INTRODUCTION TO 
HUMAN  RIGHTS  AND DUTIES
INTRODUCTION TO 
HUMAN  RIGHTS  AND DUTIES
UNIVERSITY OF PUNE

INTRODUCTION TO 
HUMAN RIGHTS AND DUTIES
Dr.T . S.N.Sastry
His Excellency Shri. K. Sankaranarayanan
Dr. R. K. Shevgoankar
Professor & Head
Department of Law
University of Pune
Foreword
Hon'ble Governor of Maharashtra
Preface
Vice Chancellor
University of Pune
UNIVERSITY OF PUNE
Published by :
Registrar,
University of Pune,
Ganeshkhind, Pune - 411 007.
Printed at :
Ganeshkhind, Pune - 411 007.
First Edition 2011
No part of this book or the slides shall be reproduced in any manner without the prior 
permission of the University of Pune.
University of Pune Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of URLs 
for external or third-party internet website referred to in this publication, and does not 
guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate or 
appropriate.
Dr. Manik Jadhav
University of Pune Press
© University of Pune
August 2011. 
Forward
Preface 
Acknowledgments
INTRODUCTION
1 Significance of Value 1
2 Human Values 2
3 Dignity 3
4 Liberty  4
5 Equality 5
6 Justice 6
7 Ethics and Morals 7
8 Unity in Diversity 8
9  Meaning and Significance of 8
Human Rights Education
10 Objectives of Human Rights Education 9
(A) Summary 10
(B) Multiple Choice Questions 11
UNIT I 
BASIC CONCEPTS
Contents: 
UNIT II
Perspective of Rights and Duties
PART A Rights
1 Etymology of Right 12
2 Meaning of Right 12
3 Analysis of Right 12
4 Natural Rights 13
5 Legal Rights 14
6 Claim Rights and Liberty Rights 15
7 Positive and Negative Rights 15
8 Individual and Group Rights 16
9 Universal Rights 16
1 Definitional Differences between 17
Obligation and Duty
2 Concept of Duty 18
3  The Different Types of Duties 19
A. Natural and Acquired Duties
B. Positive and Negative Duties
C. Perfect and Imperfect Duties
D. Prima facie and all things 
considered as Duties
4 Rights and Protections accorded to 20
Human Rights Defenders
5 The Duties of States 21
6 The Responsibilities of Everyone 22
7 The Role of National Law 22
8 Impact of Duty on Society 23  
9 Duty As a Value 24
10 Relationship between Rights and Duties 25
11 Summary : 26
(A) Rights
(B) Duties
12 Model Questions 28
PART B Nature and Concept of Duties
1 Note on Legal Instruments 29
2 Treaty 30
3 Bilateral Treaty 30
4 Multilateral Treaty 30
5 Convention and Covenant 31
6 Declaration 31
7 Protocol 32
8 Conference 32
9 Resolutions  32
10 Charter and Statute 33
11 Executive orders 33
12 Summary 33
13 Multiple Choice Questions 34
UNIT III
Introduction to Terminology of Various Legal Instruments
UNIT IV
UNITED NATIONS AND HUMAN RIGHTS
1. An Overview of UN System 35
2. Provisions of the UN Charter dealing with Human Rights 40 
3. Universal Declaration of Human Rights: 41
Technical background
4. Significance of the UDHR 44  
5. Analysis of the Declaration 45
Preamble of the Declaration 46
Article 1 Free and equal in dignity and right 50
Article. 2 Prohibition of discrimination 52
Article 3 Right to Life, Liberty, and Security 53
Article 4 Prohibition of Slavery 54
Article 5 Prohibition of Torture 56
Article 6 Right to Recognition as Person before the Law 57
Article 7  Equality before the Law 58
Article 8  Right to an Effective Remedy 59
Article 9  Prohibition of Arbitrary Arrest 59
Article 10  Right to a Fair Trial 61
Article 11 Presumption of Innocence and 62
no retroactive application of Penal Laws
Article 12 Right to Privacy 64
Article 13 Freedom of Movement exit and re-entry 65
Article 14 Right to Asylum        66
Article 15 Right to Nationality 67
Article 16 Right to Marry and Family Life 68
Article 17 Right to Property 69
Article 18 Freedom of Thought, Conscience and Religion 70
Article 19 Freedom of Opinion and Expression 71
Article 20 Freedom of Assembly and Association 71
Article 21 Participation in Government 72
Article 22 Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 73
Article 23 Right to Work 75
Article 24 Right to Rest and Leisure 76
Article 25 Right to an Adequate 77
Standard of Living and Health
Article 26 Right to Education 79
Article 27 Right to Culture 80
Article 28 Social and International Order 81
Article 29 Duties and Limitations 82
Article 30 No Abuse of Rights  84
6. Summary 84
7. Conclusion 85
8. Multiple Choice Questions 87
9. General Information 88
 ANNEXURE 
Suggestive Reading Materials 
1. Books 88
2. Journals and Documents 89
3. Reference of Acknowledgement 90
FOREWORD


If  faith in ourselves had been more extensively taught and practiced, I am sure a very 
large portion of  the evils and miseries that we have would have vanished.   
The above statement of Swami Vivekananda carries the message that one should 
always be truthful and benevolent to oneself, and to the community of humankind at 
all times with devotion to discharge his/her duties which alone will enable generating 
respect for humankind leading to a peaceful life. This is exactly what the nation-states 
proposed to achieve by adopting the Charter of the UN, and later by the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights during the late forties. The adoption of these two major 
documents, supplemented by a number of other international instruments asserts 
restoration of the degraded system of values across the world. 
In general, there has been ignorance about adhering to the compelling ethics of 
international law of human rights both by the nation-states and the humanity as a 
whole. The ignorance of promotion and practice of human rights have had its impact 
in widening the gap between the rich and the poor, both in the international and 
national spheres. The turn of events in the 70's and 80's have brought in  horrendous  
events of hunger, mass movements, genocide, racism, torture, human trafficking, 
terrorism, infighting among individuals, corruption, discriminative practices on the 
grounds of sex, language, religion, race, abuse of rights of weaker sections et.al. In 
order to restore the confidence of people across various communities, and to reassure 
the concepts of life, liberty, equality, peace and security, the international community 
PREFACE 

in 1993 at the World Conference on Human Rights at Vienna laid emphasis on 
imparting the noble principles of human rights through education. Accordingly, in 
1995, the General Assembly adopted a resolution, and declared the period 1995-2004 
as the Decade of Human Rights Education followed by the present decade 2005-2014 
as the Decade of Education for Sustainable Development. The efforts of the UN and 
the world community to restore peace and security, and to inculcate the normative 
values of life, liberty, dignity, equality, justice, moral and ethical principles would 
indeed bring in the desired results.   
In tune with its commitment to promote values of peace and friendship, and to 
develop harmonious relations, the UN had adopted a number of legal instruments, 
highlighting the need to initiate action by nation-states at the international and 
national level. Education alone being the important potential weapon to eliminate all 
kinds of ignorance and to tap the inner knowledge inherited in humans, the UN and 
the States chose to impart the values of human rights through education for 
sustainable development of humanity. According to the guidelines and directions of 
the UN, the High Commissioner for Human Rights of the UN drew a number of plans 
to oversee that the Human Rights Education is imparted to all sections of the people 
through school, college and university education, and mass based programmes 
throughout the world are conducted with the aid and help of states and non-
governmental organizations.
The Government of India drew up its National Policy on Education announced 
in 1968. The policy was revised  under the leadership of the then Prime Minister Late 
Shri Rajiv Gandhi who drew up a plan of action to impart knowledge about the 
developments of scientific, technological, moral and ethical values through education 
to eliminate illiteracy and other maladies of the society. Around the same time, the 
UGC prepared a blue print for  imparting Education on Human Rights and Duties at 
the Universities and Colleges with the following  objectives: (a) to develop interaction 
between society and the educational institutions (b)  to sensitize the citizens for the 
norms and values of human rights and duties (c) to encourage research activities 
related to human rights and (d) to encourage research studies concerning the 
relationship between human rights and duties and International Humanitarian law .
It has further emphasized that such promotion is necessary to generate 
awareness, conviction, and commitment to values for improving the quality of human 
life which will in turn encourage Universities and Colleges to take steps for 
dissemination of values and morals through Human Rights and Duties in different 
modes. With this aim, the UGC provided funding for establishing Human Rights and 
Duties Education centers in various Universities in the Country. However, due to lack 
of active patronization by the stake holders, reluctance of the people to take part in the 
activities of such centers, and lack of administrative and financial support by the 
Universities, many centers in the country could not achieve the targets and some of 
them even have been closed by the Universities.
In this background, the Government of India enacted the Human Rights Act in 
1993 to develop respect for values of Human Rights and to Prevent the violations of 
the Human Rights. This Act provided provisions to establish Human Rights 
Commissions in every State. Apart from the protection mechanism, the Act has also 
empowered the Human Rights Commissions to initiate necessary steps for the 
propagation of Human Rights and Duties education through various means. In 
August 2010, the State Human Rights Commission of Maharashtra conducted a one 
day seminar on incorporation of human rights education on mass scale, to students of 
elementary to University level. The seminar was graced by the highest level of state 
dignitaries, His Excellency the Hon'ble Governor of Maharashtra, Shri. K. 
Sankaranarayanan, and the Chief Minister, Mr. Ashok Chavan, Deputy Chief 
Minister, Mr. Chhagan Bhujbal, Minister of Higher and Technical Education, Mr. 
Rajesh Tope, and other Ministers and Secretaries of the State of Maharashtra. In order 
to support the venture of the State Human Rights Commission, and to make the state 
of Maharashtra, the first state in India to take lead in offering Human Rights and 
Duties Education, University of Pune decided to introduce mandatory education in 
Human rights in all its programmes. On behalf of the University, myself being the 
academic head of the University in my capacity as the Vice Chancellor, along with  
Professor W .N. Gade, the Director of BCUD and Dr.T.S.N.Sastry, Head of 
Department of Law , prepared the Human Rights Education model and presented 
before the august gathering. The presentation received wide spread appreciation. 
University of Pune further made a firm commitment to promote Human Rights 
Education by introducing a compulsory component on Human Rights and Duties for 
all the students of University of Pune from the academic year 2011. 
To work out the curriculum details of the Human Rights Education at University 
of Pune, a Committee on Human Rights Education consisting of professors of various 
departments of the University was constituted. Considering expertise and experience 
in the fields of International Law and Human Rights, Dr.T.S.N.Sastry, Head of 
Department of Law has been appointed as the coordinator of the project. Also the 
Department of Law has been named as the coordinating centre of the project. Other 
members who made significant contribution to the project are, Dr. W .N. Gade, Dr. 
D.A. Patel, Dr. Manohar Jadhav , Dr. Sharmila Rege, Dr. A. N. Dalvi, Dr. (Captain) 
C.M. Chitale, Dr. S.D. Dhole, Dr. B.A. Chopade, Dr. Raja Dixit, Dr. Dilip Dhawale, 
Dr. N.R. Karmalkar, Dr. B.R. Shejwal, Dr. S. E. Bhelke, Dr. Y .M. Sumant, and Dr. 
Vilas Kharat.  After prolonged deliberations of the committee on various issues, it has 
been unanimously accepted to offer three compulsory courses, one credit each at all 
levels in the University of Pune. The proposal has been approved by all the decision 
making bodies of the University and the implementation of the scheme will 
commence from the academic year 2011-12. The three courses which will be taken by 
all students of the university during their academic programme, are: 
The present book is the text for the first course, 'Introduction to Human Rights 
and Duties'. 
The basic aim of the course is to introduce the students, the values and culture of 
human rights, and to make them aware the benefits we get out of it by strict adherence 
to tenets of them. The structure and presentation of the various concepts are made in a 
simple manner largely without going into the theoretical intricacies that they innate 
with them.
The material has been prepared and presented based on consultation of a 
number of books, research articles from reputed international law and Human Rights 
1) Introduction to Human Rights and Duties 
2) Human Rights and Vulnerable Groups 
3) Human Rights and Duties in India: Law , Policy, Society, and Enforcement 
Mechanism 
journals & Judical decisions and other allied subject journals,  books published by the 
UNESCO, National Book Trust of India, web pages such as Wikipedia, Stanford 
University of Philosophy, etc. The photos presented in the book are mostly from the 
various web pages of the United Nations, Google that tied up with the UN for the 
Propagation of Human Rights Values, other regional organizations, and web pages of 
a number of NGOs who are actively engaged in propagation of the ideals of human 
rights. 
The development of the course material is purely with an intention of inculcating 
practices of Human Rights amongst the youths of the university and the authors have 
no commercial motivation. A small amount of honorarium has been paid to each unit 
writer as a token of appreciation. Moreover, the University being the publisher (mostly 
in the e-format coupled with recorded lectures), the materials used, photos presented 
in the work are within the permissible limit of copy right law for dissemination with an 
acknowledgement. However, if any reference is missed out in the acknowledgement, it 
may be due to over sight and not with any intention. We express our gratitude and 
thanks to all whose work has been included in the course material for the propagation 
of the ideals of the UN. 
The material is prepared with utmost care and precision. However, this being a 
maiden venture by a University for the first time in the country, any suggestion for the 
improvement of the material in future versions is welcome. 
His Excellency, the Hon'ble Governor of  Maharashtra, Shri K. 
Sankarnarayanan has been a constant source of inspiration in fulfillment of the 
commitment made by the University. I am indebted to His Excellency for entrusting 
this responsibility to University of Pune. I take this opportunity to thank all the 
authorities of the University for their Cooperation and timely approvals for the 
implementation of the programme. I also thank the Chairperson and Members of the 
Maharashtra State Human Rights Commission for driving the idea of making the 
State of Maharashtra, the first state in the country to fullfill the commitment made by 
the Union of India to the international community. My thanks are also due to all the 
Professors who participated in all the discussions and guided us to achieve the target.
Last but not the least, the entire book has been written by Dr.T.S.N.Sastry, 
Professor and Head of the Department of Law , University of Pune in a short span of 
time. I wish him all the success for the completion of the other two books and the audio 
visual course material on time. 
As per the state requirement, the programme will be conducted in English and 
Marathi. The courses in English are generally meant for the Post Graduate 
Departments and Professional courses of the University.  The course will be offered in 
Marathi for the Under Graduate programmes in the Colleges. The University also 
intends to present the materials in video lecture format. The lectures will be 
disseminated in the form of DVDs as well as through the Website of the University. 
I hope the idea of propagation of human rights in university education will be 
appreciated and emulated by other Universities and Institutes in the state, and in the 
country.
I appeal to every student of the University as future torch bearers, to carry the 
mantle of propagation and practice of human rights on their shoulders to overcome 
the present day maladies of the country. This alone can establish the concept of social 
justice in its true perspective as architected by the Constitution of India by the 
legendary architect Bharat Ratna Dr. B.R. Ambedkar.
Date: 8.08.2011.
Dr. R.K. Shevgaonkar
Vice Chancellor, University of Pune
This book has been written to meet the requirements of the Human Rights & 
Duties Education Programme of the University.  A great task of this nature cannot be 
completed without the constant support of many people.I take this opportunity to 
thank all of them sincerely.
Let me express my deep sense of gratitude to His Excellency, the Governor of 
Maharashtra, and the Chancellor of the University, Shri K. Sankarnarayanan, for his 
all round encouragement and commitment for the promotion of human rights 
education. I express my sincere thanks for agreeing to write a forward. 
I thank the Hon'ble Vice Chancellor Dr R.K. Shevgaonkar, who inspite of 
being a technocrat, shown keen interest in the dissemination of the ideals of human 
rights. The day he received the invitation from the State Human Rights Commission of 
Maharashtra inviting educational institutions to involve in the propagation of Human 
Rights in the State of Maharashtra, he decided to launch the programme of Human 
Rights education as part of the University curricula to all its students.  From July 2010, 
immediately after few months of his joining in the University, the amount of time and 
interest he has evinced in the implementation of the project is praise worthy. I sincerely 
thank from the bottom of my heart for the trust, and providing the opportunity for me 
to work as the coordinator of the project.
I extend my thanks to the Director of Board of College and University 
development, Prof (Dr) W .N. Gade for his constant support all through, and his 
valuable contribution at various stages in preparing the course and in its 
implementation. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I also thank all the respective bodies of the University for extending their 
support for the approval of the programme.
All the Professors of the Human Rights Education Committee of the 
University and other members who extended their constant support through 
discussions and suggestions in making the project a reality are appreciable.  My sincere 
gratitude is extended to one and all.
I thank the Chairman, Board of Studies, Faculty of Law , University of Pune, 
Dr. S.R Bhosale, for all the encouragement and support. 
I express thanks to Dr. D.A. Patel, Associate Professor, Department of Law for 
spending long hours in the preparation of the syllabi, the book, and extending all the 
material and moral support. I furthermore express my thanks to Dr. S.E, Bhelke, Head, 
Department of Philosophy, University of Pune for all the support and going through 
the script in the crystallization of philosophical concepts. I express my thanks to Ms. 
Sonia Nagarale, Assistant Professor, Department of Law for her constant support and 
help in all through. I thank Mr. Y .S.R. Murty, the Director of the Centre for Human 
Rights, Jindal Global University, New Delhi, and the former Director of Research 
NHRC for his efforts in going through the script and the suggestions rendered. 
I extend my gratitude to Mr. Sadiq, A. J. Syed, acting Country Director, UN 
Women, Afghanisthan,  who took pains in delivering the lecture on the efforts of the 
UN and India in the implementation of the Human Rights Education to the members 
of the Human Rights Committee of the University and offering his valuable 
suggestions. I also take this opportunity to  thank my other colleagues and the non-
teaching staff members of the Department of Law for their cooperation. I also thank 
my wife Smt. G.B.V . Anuradha and my two young daughters Anoosha and Medha for 
being a moral support in completing the task as their cooperation without minding me 
burning the midnight lamps for several weeks and not paying serious attention to my 
domestic commitments.
I also thank my Ph.D. Scholar Fr. Peter Ladis F , Chanakya National Law 
University, Patna for rendering the possible assistance whatever that was sought by me 
in compiling this handbook.
I express my sincere thanks to European Commission, Dr. Sidsel Hansson 
Project Director of Erasmus Mundus Exteranal Window Lot 13 India & Dr. Roger 
Greatrex, Director Centre for East & South East Asian Studies, University of Lund for 
all their assistance during my stay in Lund University, Sweden during July 2010 which 
helped me to equipe myself in presenting research perspectives in human rights  as a 
part of my research trip.
I thank all the authors of  the books, journals, articles and materials of various 
organisations consulted and the web pages I browsed for the inspiration, in authoring 
the materials in a lay man's perspective. Since the object of the book is to prepare the 
text in a common man's perspective, the ideas and expressions of all the materials 
consulted are presented here only for propagation and educational purposes. I thank 
all other authorities and officers of the University and Mr. Dattatraya Kute, Manager, 
and  staff of the University Press in bringing out the book with due care and in record 
time.
Last but not the least, this being the first time, the consulted material is used 
carefully to crystallize into a book form and this book has been drafted with great care 
and concern to make it easily understandable to everyone. However, if any unintended 
errors have crept in, I express my due apologies and invite the comments and 
suggestions for improvement in future. 
  
Professor & Head,
Department of Law and Coordinator of the 
Human Rights Education Programme,
 University of Pune
Date 09.08.2011
Dr. T . S. N. Sastry
This work is a culmination of the idea of propagation about the objectives of 
Human Rights through education by the UN, Government of India and the State of 
Maharashtra. According to the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action of the 
World Conference on Human Rights, 1993, the objectives of Human Rights could be 
achieved mainly through Human Rights Education. These objectives are promotion 
of stable and harmonious friendly relations among communities of the world for 
fostering mutual understanding, tolerance and to establish peace. In order to achieve 
this commitment, the UN declared the Decade 1995-2004, as the decade of Human 
Rights Education which is followd by the present decade 2005-2014. Finally in 
November 2012,  the General assembly declared that human rights education is a life 
long process to be imparted at every level of education across the world. Accordingly, 
it chalked out an Action Plan for its implementation by the states at the national level. 
The Government of India declared the same objective in its first education policy in 
1968 itself. The State of Maharashtra is probably the first in the country, to launch 
human rights teaching in a small way in the school curriculum. As these efforts have 
not fully  yielded the desired results, the University of Pune has taken the mantle on its 
shoulders to render its share of service for the state and the nation as well. The present 
work in your hands is part one of the series of the book under the project of Human 
Rights Education for all the students of the University of Pune. 
INTRODUCTION
BASIC CONCEPTS
Significance  of  Value 
 This Unit will briefly introduce the basic concepts of  values and the linkage that they have 
with human rights. These conceptual perspectives play a significant role for the promotion and 
realization of  human rights in any society. Values help to crystallize any legal action, and play a 
very important role in the development of  a society. The strict adherence of  each of  these values 
not only helps in the realization of  human rights but to establish the concept of  one world as 
envisaged by international law. This unit focuses in without much debate and discussion on the 
theoretical perspective, the meaning of  each one of  the value. It briefly, highlights the significance 
of  human rights education.  However, some of  the concepts are dealt in detail in Unit II, while 
explaining the origin and concept of  right to the extent necessary.            
Value in general is a part of philosophy. Philosophy is one of the basic subjects 
which deals with the basic problems of mankind. In its discourse, it deals with issues 
such as existence, knowledge, values, reasons, mind, and language.  It's theoretical 
perspective developed by various theoreticians mainly based on a rational approach 
with critical outlook. Basing on the parameters of value, a number of other aspects 
developed to regulate the behavioral patterns of man. These values such as dignity, 
liberty, equality justice, ethics, and morals et.al., have had their significant impact to 
shape the human relations in a society. These philosophical concepts have a profound 
impact on law .  
The main aim and function of Law in any society is to regulate the relations 
between men and to alleviate the intensity of conflicts to promote peace, security, good 
and orderly behaviour of mankind to establish a conflict free society. This being the 
main function of law , it absorbs all the essential tools from every field of study with a 
critical outlook. This in turn will help to analyse each issue and lay norms to develop a 
rational human mind to achieve maximum results in their inter-relationships with 
each other. Since the concept of right and its exercise and regulation centered round 
basing on a number of values developed from ancient to modern times, they have had a 
great impact in the realization, promotion, and protection of human rights. In view of 
the linkage and importance that values play a significant role in the promotion and 
realization of human rights; the different concepts of values are examined in brief.
UNIT I
11
Human Values
"The value concept… [is] able to unify the apparently diverse interests of  all the sciences 
concerned with human behavior."……Rokeach. 
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
The above view of the psychologist makes it clear, the concept of value and its 
relationship with the behavioural pattern of individuals in a society. In general, we 
think of values that are commonly followed by us in day to day life. These values vary 
from person to person, depending on their experiences and circumstances in which 
they grow . However, there are certain basic values which are common to all. They are 
life, liberty, security, freedom, and success, security to life, kindness, pain and pleasure.  
Depending on the circumstances, which  each person grow up considers which value is 
important to him. But adhering to values which are common to all, in the longer run 
develop a society to establish peace for the progressive all round development of all the 
sections of a society. This will help to learn to live with unity in diversity.
According to a number of scholars, conceptually values are beliefs which are 
subjective in their exercise by each individual. Values motivate people to achieve their 
goals. Values transcend time and territory and develop relationships and regulate the 
behavioral patterns of individuals.
These being the central aspects of values, a number of scholars identified ten 
basic values, which motivate and regulate the behavior of human beings in achieving 
their goals. They are :
Self-destruction, which promotes an independent thought which results in a 
judicious decision making process in creating or exploring the goal.
Stimulation creates excitement, novelty and challenges in life.
Hedonism (Self Satisfaction) brings in pleasure and sensuous gratification for 
oneself.
Achievement demonstrates, the competence of individuals according to the 
standards of society.  
Power brings in social status and prestige, control over people, and resources.  
Security brings in harmonious relationship between individuals, to guide the 
society to establish a compatible environment for people to lead a life with 
pleasure and groom their freedoms.
Conformity to social standards mainly regulates the behaviour of individuals, 
2
and prevent the wrong doing activities by individuals to themselves, and towards 
one another in the society. 
Tradition promotes the qualities of respect to the practices that are inherent in 
society.
Religion promotes the innovation of knowledge and furtherance of values to the 
achievement of peace and security. It teaches a happy sharing of the benefits that 
are derived through the promotion of knowledge.
Benevolence establishes the belief, and enhances the qualities of welfare to 
promote the interests of the individuals with whom each one interacts in their 
day to day activities.
 Lastly, universalism promotes the qualities of understanding, appreciation, 
tolerance, and protection for the welfare of people. It takes care of developing 
harmonious living, and to work for the benefit of advancement of scientific 
knowledge, and to share the resources equally.
The philosophy of human rights is similar with that of the above values. 
Therefore, values are one of the basic aspects of human rights. The strict adherence of 
human rights restores not only to values, but also in turn able to achieve peace, security 
and harmonious living community without any kind of discrimination that exist 
between individuals and nation-states.
Dignity is another value that regulates the behaviour of individuals. Dignity is a 
relative term with regulatory nature. It prescribes the norms and ethical standards 
needs to be followed and adopted.
 In the day to day inter-relationships, individuals are expected to behave with one 
another in a dignified and honest manner. This concept dictates that every one of us 
has to exercise due caution and care in our relations without undermining the 
capacities of other persons. Further, it teaches us not to create a situation wherein 
others are made to undergo either emotional, psychological, physical, tense situations, 
or to harm their personality.
Since dignity plays a vital role, in regulating the human relations and for the 
furtherance of human rights, (especially, the basic rights of liberty, equality, and 
freedom), the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), in no uncertain terms 
m
m
m
m
Dignity
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
3
declared that all individuals are equal in the eye of law . All are deserves to be treated 
with utmost respect without harming the dignity of others at all times. If people across 
the world follow the ethical norm of dignity without any deviance, the realisation of 
right would be easy. This fundamental norm applies to individuals and States to follow 
with strict adherence. In the modern context though a number of conventions, 
covenants, and declarations have been adopted in the international arena, to promote 
human rights on the concept of dignity. The lack of adherence by individuals and 
nation-states brought in untold sorrow , and miseries to mankind. The non adherence 
to ethical values, especially, indecent behaviour of individuals at times, posing a 
number of problems in the contemporary era. This in turn has an effect in the 
promotion and realisation of human rights.
  
 Liberty is another concept which play a vital role in the promotion of human 
rights. Liberty is an ancient concept. This concept has its roots in the political 
philosophy. A number of philosophers like, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, and many 
more have articulated Liberty in different contexts. In simple terms, liberty means, 
human beings are free to regulate their relations, and are able to govern their relations, 
behave at their own will, and be responsible for their acts. The concept of liberty is 
centred around responsibility or duty. Basing on the acts performed by individuals, 
liberty can be  enjoyed or achieved. If the acts are bad or performed with an intention 
to defray anybody or deprive them of their legal claims, they not only affect the rights 
of others, but also of their own in the long run. This in turn will have an effect on the 
realisation of their rights. 
The concept of liberty is the basics for the development of a right. According to 
Hobbes, every individual is empowered to enjoy their freedoms freely without the 
interference of any other person. In his social contract theory, he argued that the divine 
will of kings to regulate the relations and to restrict the freedoms of individuals is 
antithesis to liberty of individuals. The enlightenment of liberty by various political 
and legal philosophers, led to  a number of political revolutions across the world. This 
in turn led to establish democratic societies on the basis of liberty of individuals to 
choose their leaders. 
In the contemporary era, the excessive arguments for liberty, and its 
indiscriminate exercise without strict adherence to duty by individuals in their 
Liberty
4
numerous acts, again resulted in bringing miseries to the world. In order to resolve the 
problems and to provide a problemfree world, the UN took a number of legal steps for 
the promotion of human rights. The aim of these acts of UN is to regulate the 
behaviour of the mankind and to guide them to discharge their duties to uplift the 
moral and ethical values. This in turn will help to restore liberty in its true sense and 
makes individuals to be happy for their legal and justified actions. 
Apart from the above, it is the duty of 
nation-states also to adhere to the principles 
of international law and human rights in 
their relations, respecting the concept of 
liberty of the other nations and their citizens. 
The Strict adherence to liberty and practice 
of self restraint alone would yield the 
desired results in protecting the rights of 
every citizen as guaranteed by law .
Equality is another important component of human rights. From ancient to 
modern times, people are fighting to achieve this in terms of its practical application to 
each situation. In general, equality proposes to bring all the people into one category, 
and apply the principles of law , and justice without any distinction, whatsoever it may 
be among the individuals. Equality is a relative concept which may be distinguished 
basing on a number of factors, and the enjoyment of rights on an equal footing.  The 
aim of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Constitutions of the 
various countries including India are to treat all the people on an equal footing without 
any kind of discrimination. This may be referred to formal equality, wherein in the 
eyes of law all are equal. 
Although, all people are numerically considered as equal in the eyes of law , in 
providing the amenities or distribution of resources, all may not be considered or 
treated as equal in reality. This is because of the socio, economic, political and cultural 
conditions that prevail in each society. In order to uplift the people who are not equal 
on any ground specified above, they need to be given certain concessions and facilities 
to improve their status and to reach the equal status with that of others who are on a 
high pedestal.  
Equality 
5
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
To achieve the rigour of equality and to 
fill the gap especially on socio-economic, and 
cultural grounds, the principles of  
international law of human rights provides for 
the necessary concessions to be extended, to 
people at the national level by states. This will 
result in to achieve the status of equality of all 
in the eye of law . Once they achieve the equal 
status in all respects, the concessions extended 
to  specific group of people  to uplift their status, may be withdrawn by the state. The  
same principle applies to states at the International level. Accordingly the developed 
states need to extend concessions to the developing states.
Justice in simple terms may be defined as righteousness, 
fair and to be treated on just and equitable grounds. Justice is an 
important concept which has attracted a number of fields 
especially, law and philosophy. To achieve absolute justice, 
scholars have prescribed a number of factors. Basing on the 
various factors that are relevant to each society, and to fill the 
gap between unequals and equals, from ancient to modern 
times, a number of scholars have advocated various theories to 
achieve the concept of justice. In order to measure the concept 
of Justice, a number of tools are required. To achieve perfect justice, it lays its emphasis 
on concepts of equality, morality and ethics. The aim of human rights is to provide 
such stable conditions to everyone by the states, which alone could help to achieve the 
rights in a justiciable manner. According to Plato, Justice being the highest value, and 
to attain it, an individual has to be provided with all the necessary conditions to realise 
the right, and to discharge his duties towards society. It again lay emphasis on the 
actors and the state as well to discharge every single obligation with devotion of duty 
and respect for other values.
Justice
6
Ethics and Morals
Ethics and Morals are considered as equal concepts. However, there exists a 
subtle difference between these two. Morals deal with the personal character of an 
individual. On the other hand, Ethics lays its importance on a social system, which 
regulates the code of conduct of a group of individuals. In other words, the morals 
need to be applied in each society depending on the values that are acceptable by a 
society. From the perspective of human rights, the concept of freedom and liberty 
being basic principles forms part of moral principles. The concept of Justice, Equality 
and the participation of individuals in the socio-cultural aspects of the community are 
ethical aspects. Accordingly, every human being in a society is responsible at all times  
to strive to achieve human rights as a moral or ethical subject of society.
Value is the central issue of ethics. Ethics is a normative science of human 
conduct in society, which differentiates between right and wrong, good or bad, proper 
or improper. The standard, which makes one to differentiate good from bad or right 
from wrong, is a value. Ethics with reference to human rights presupposes freedom as a 
necessary pre-condition. A free man can take his decision of action and such a decision 
can be evaluated as good or bad, right or wrong, proper or improper. Goodness is the 
highest of value. Goodness is objective, universal and rational.  Some basic values are: 
courage, tolerance, benevolence, kindness and friendship. Values are instrumental or 
absolute, intrinsic or extrinsic. 
Values provide a standard to decide that an action is good. The basic issues of 
ethics/moral philosophy are: freedom, duty, rights, responsibility, happiness and 
goodness. Values are based on common or social consent. They are shared by all in the 
society.  
The above brief discussion of the various concepts, highlight the significance 
that human rights can never be achieved in toto until and unless, we the people of the 
United Nations (which includes the nation-states), discharge the responsibilities with 
utmost sincerity. This in turn enables us to achieve, universalization of human rights 
without any kind of deviation to race, sex, language, religion, region, etc. This leads 
one to learn how to live in a diversified world, more particularly in the contemporary 
era of fourth phase of globalization, wherein the concept of unity in diversity assumes 
greater significance than in yester years.
7
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
Unity in Diversity
Meaning and Significance of Human Rights Education
Unity in diversity in general means, people of different backgrounds basing on 
their socio-economical, politico-cultural perspectives have to live like a single family. 
This means, the different faiths and characters that people posses have to live in a 
compatible manner under a single legal roof governed by a State. The same is 
applicable to people around the world, and the nation-states learn to live as one 
community. This being the main aim of international law to establish a one world 
concept, it had given birth to human rights. Its aim is to achieve, the aspirations of 
profoundly divided humanity by setting a common standard of norms for all people 
and all nations. To accomplish the one world concept, the mankind has a responsibility 
to learn to live harmoniously. Further, it will enable us to achieve the basic tenets of 
life, liberty, equality, dignity and freedom of thought and expression with due care and 
caution to promote the rights of all the people living in different political systems. This 
will in turn enable us to claim legitimately the protection extended by human rights. 
And, to justify the existence of man as a human kind living under different political 
regions. It will help further, to establish the fundamental goal of United Nations to 
resolve innumerable problems that are 
haunting us both nationally and 
internationally. Nearer home, the concept 
of 'vasudhaiva kutumbakam', in the Indian 
context advocates the same ideology of 
living together of mankind with values and 
morals, which alone ultimately establish a 
conflict free society.
Education should encompass values such as peace, non-discrimination, equality, 
justice, non-violence, tolerance, to live in peace and security and respect for human 
dignity. These objectives can be achieved only through imparting human rights 
education, which is an integral part of right to education. Human Rights and Duties 
Education helps in achieving a comprehensive growth of every society. 
According to the UN decade document for human rights education (1995-2004), 
human rights education means, “a lifelong process by which people at all levels of 
development and in all strata of society learn respect for the dignity of others and 
the means and methods of ensuring that respect in all societies.” 
8
From the above definition, it is clear that people living in any society have to 
discharge their duties with utmost sincerity at all times without any deviation. Such 
practices will promote the freedoms of all and could transform a society to achieve its 
objectives. This being the concern of human rights education, impartation of it results 
in, to achieving the principles of democracy, rule of law , and social justice. Further, it 
will help to establish peace and security. It further enables us to achieve an all round 
socio-economic, political, and cultural sustainability. 
 
Human Rights Education promotes respect for human rights of all individuals.
It develops the knowledge, skills, and values of human rights.
It develops the socio-psychological, human personality.
It helps people and policy makers to evolve the ways and means to overcome the 
problems of each nation and that of the International Community.
It helps to foster understanding, tolerance, gender equality and
Develops friendship among all nations and eliminates racial, ethnic, religious, 
and linguistic differences.
A number of models are developed to impart the above values of human rights 
education. Among the various models, the following three considered as the vital ones, 
to achieve the aims and objectives of human rights.
 This model focuses on transmitting basic 
knowledge of human rights and to foster the integration into public values 
through a curriculum of educational institutions.
 This model focuses on the ways in which 
professional responsibilities to inculcate directly monitoring human rights 
violations and advocating the authorities to protect the rights of the people.
 This model aims to empower the individuals in 
order to recognize the abuses of human rights and their prevention.
These being the core concepts of human rights education, the UN has framed 
guidelines to propagate human rights through various methods and means both in the 
International and the National levels.
Objectives of Human Rights Education
1. Values and Awareness Model:
2. Accountability Model:
3. Transformational Model:
Summary:
m
m
m
m
m
m
9
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
¦
¦
¦
¦
¦
¦
¦
¦
Value being an important aspect of life, it forms part of Law and Society. Value 
being a central point regulates the relations between individuals; scholars have 
identified number of points. By adhering to these points, an individual can 
achieve the goals in life. 
Dignity being another aspect of value regulates the behaviour of individuals.  
The human relations and the exercise of human rights depend on the dignity, is 
the most important aspect in the basic rights of liberty, equality and freedom. 
The entire human rights law has been developed basing on these aspects.
Liberty is another important concept. According to various scholars, duty alone 
protects the concept of liberty.  It is this concept that has given a basis for right.  If 
liberty is not exercised properly, it will result in upsetting the applecart of rights.  
Equality is an important component of human rights. Equality proposes to bring 
in all people under one category. Any kind of inequalities are in existence, it is for 
the States to eliminate them through a legal mechanism. This will result into a 
classless society. 
The aim of human rights is to do justice to every individual. In order to achieve 
perfect justice, all the qualities of human kind and the values need to be followed 
by every individual to achieve the realistic concept of justice.
Ethics deals with personal character of individuals. Morals lay emphasis on the 
social system. The strict adherence of ethical practices alone makes a society 
healthy which in turn could help the people to realise their human rights.
There exist a number of differences between various individuals in a society. 
However, obedience to human rights will result in living together with unity in 
diversity among the individuals. The outcome of it will bridge the gap between 
nation-states and to establish the concept of one world.
Human Rights Education teaches us the practice of various values to be adhered. 
At the same time, the knowledge of it, transforms individuals accountable for 
their acts either at personal level or societal level.  The knowledge of human 
rights would also lead us to establish an orderly, peaceful, and friendly society 
both at the international and national spheres.
10
Model Questions
1. Which subject in general deals with values?
2. What does dignity conveys?
3. Which concept gave the basis for  right?
4.  Ethics deals with what aspect ?
5. Human Rights Education is………….
Multiple Choice Questions 
1. What does Unity in Diversity exactly means?
2. What is advocated by Ethical Values?
3. What is the main aim of Human Rights?
4. Values Model is part of which of the basic concept?
Write only one Word answer to the questions
(A) Philosophy
(A) A Decent behaviour
(A)  Liberty  
(A) Personal character
(A)  life Long Process
(A)Single family (B) living together with differences (C) a place for everyone
(D) living together with respect to every one's recognised dignified practices
(A)Social system (B) compassionate living (C) Devotional living (D) Rule 
making 
(A) To teach Morals and ethics (B) to develop friendly relations (C) to make 
people sensible (D) to establish peace, security and one world 
(A) Dignity (B) Human Rights Education (C) Liberty (D) Justice
Answer : (1) D (2) A  (3) D (4) B
11
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
Perspective of Rights and Duties
 This Unit will briefly summarize the meaning of  rights and their importance and the 
conceptual perspective in brief. It will examine the relationship between rights and duties and the 
values that bind on the individual in discharging their duties towards one another in a civilized 
society.
(A) Rights
Etymology of `right':
Meaning of a Right: 
Analysis of Right :
The word which we use in the modern English terminology has its origin from the 
old English right or reht.  In the early periods, it had been used with different 
nomenclatures in various languages across the World.  Accordingly, it has gained a 
number of meanings, depending on the situation with a wide variety of expressions. In 
the language of law , they are moral, ethical entitlements which need to be conferred and 
exercised as framed by an authority of law .
Basing on the different expressions, there exist a considerable debate in the 
academic circles, especially in the fields like, Political Science, Philosophy, 
Anthropology, and Law about the foundation, meaning, and function of right in 
different contexts. Before discussing the various types of rights, a simplified meaning 
and analysis is provided here for an easy understanding of various facets of a right.
From a historical point of view , `right' in its objective sense is described as right or 
just actions that individuals have to discharge to maintain harmonious relationships 
between themselves. In the modern or subjective sense, its definition is long and 
divisive. Whatever may be the controversy, and scholarly discussion that surrounds the 
historical origins, and the different meanings that `Right' has, in general  rights mean- a 
legal sanction or normative value.
In its analytical perspective, “right” has two parts (form and function).   One is 
the internal structure of right (their form); and the other is what rights do for those who 
hold them (function). Accordingly, right is a combination of claim and duty.  This 
UNIT II
12
means a right confers certain liberties or privileges and imposes duties upon 
individuals to exercise while claiming their rights. A number of jurists define the 
concept of exercise of rights with duty as positive and negative rights.  Accordingly, 
the person who is possessive of positive rights entitled to provision of some goods or 
services. A holder of negative right is entitled to non-interference. In the eyes of law , 
Right confers on a person certain amount of liberties and privileges. At the same time 
impose obligations to discharge.  Furthermore, possessing a right should also enable a 
person to exercise it. This part of empowerment mechanism could be achieved only 
by imparting the values of human rights education. 
However, basing on the common usage of the term philosophers and political 
analysts in subjects like philosophy, 
politics, law and logic et.al., have defined 
the rights in a number of categories. 
Accordingly, rights may be broadly 
defined as 1) Natural Rights; 2) Legal 
Rights; 3) Claim rights; 4) Liberty 
Rights; 5) Positive Rights; 6) Negative 
Rights; 7) Individual Rights and 8) 
Group Rights.
The concept of Natural rights is closely associated with the philosophy or theory 
of Natural law . According to this theory, nature or God alone regulates the wisdom 
and the activities of men. The kings being the divine origin, as representatives of God, 
the rules framed by them were considered divine in nature. But in the age of 
enlightenment ( or Age of Reason) of the eighteenth century a number of Western 
advocators like, Hobbes, Locke, Hugo Grotius, Rousseau, Samuel Pufendorf, et.al., 
challenged the origin of divine concept to natural law . 
A natural right is nothing but, rights based on just, fair and reasonable. This 
means, the individuals unite themselves to form political societies through mutual 
consent, and agree to form a government of their own. It will enable them to lead their 
life through common rules and regulations framed by either them or their 
representatives. At the same time, they accept a set of legal and moral duties to be 
observed or bound by them in the exercise of their rights in order to live in peace and 
security without any violence.
Natural Rights:
A FREE HUMAN
NATURAL RIGHTS
Life free will/Liberty   Freedom
[Law]
[Principles]
13
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
      However, this being the central philosophy advocated by all philosophers of 
natural law , there is a difference of opinion that exists among them. A section of 
modern naturalists argue that since human rights are closely associated with the 
concept of natural rights,  there exist no difference between natural and human rights;
both are one and the same. But some traditionalists argue that since natural rights are 
not framed by men and are the dictates of right of reason of nature, both cannot be 
equated.  According to them, since natural rights are being above the power of any 
authority either state or international bodies, and are universal in nature, they cannot 
be equated with human rights, because they are adapted by human society through an 
international body and not of divine origin.
A close examination of both the above pictures clearly explains the theoretical 
differences. In a simple manner, natural rights essentially are the Life, Liberty and 
Freedom that an individual possess and the way to live without any disturbance or 
interference by others. Accordingly, by birth, the rights are inherited with the body of 
the individual as the gifts of God or nature. Hence, they are inherent or inalienable 
rights. 
 The second picture explains the arguments of the modern natural philosophers' 
view that though a human being is born with free will, as a social animal one has to 
have minimal limitations in the exercise of their natural rights. Because, man himself 
created the modern concept of state, they have to adhere to the laws framed by the 
state, so as not to disturb the rights of others. These rights are otherwise referred to as 
Legal Rights that are sanctioned by the authority of law which entitles a claim to an 
individual to have his rights enforced legally.
Legal Rights means, rights that are guaranteed to citizens of a country by law to 
enjoy certain freedoms without any fear or favour. Legal rights also referred to as 
statutory rights, bestowed by a particular government to the governed and are relative 
Legal Rights:
FOUNDING FATHERS
GOD RIGHTS
INDIVIDUALIST VIEW
INDIVIDUALIST 
CITY/STATE
FEDERAL
14
to specific cultures and governments. These rights are enumerated or codified into 
legal statutes by a legislative body. These rights may differ from country to country 
depending upon the constitution and culture that they adopted.  Nevertheless, at the 
same time legal rights impose an obligation on other people not to exceed the 
prescribed limits of law .
Claim rights means, the rights that impose an obligation on another person to 
respect the right of the other person. Liberty rights means, rights that are to be 
exercised at free will by the holder of rights, without any obligation on another person 
in exercise of his/her right.
 For example, a person has liberty to speak freely as he likes, is a liberty right. But 
at the same time, if it affects the rights or hurts the reputation of another person, then it 
turns into a claim right.
A section of philosophers drew a distinction, which is thin and narrow between 
positive and negative rights. Positive rights means, rights for which a person is expected 
to discharge some service or to do good independently or to the society as a whole. 
Negative rights impose an obligation on others not to interfere with the liberty or 
independence of another holder of rights. In the language of law since both rights are 
passive rights, it is difficult always to classify these rights in a strict sense. The Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) has both the characteristics of Positive and 
Negative rights. Many scholars argue that since there is a co-existence between the two 
concepts; a distinction is not necessary.   
Examples for Positive Rights: These rights normally impose duty either on the 
state or on society or a group of individuals in satisfying the claims of  owners of rights, 
(for example) Right to Education, Right to Health, Social Security etc. In the Indian 
context these are described as the Directive Principles of State Policy under the 
Constitution of India. It is not easy to achieve this category of rights as they depend on 
various factors including the resources. These rights are referred as Economic, Social 
and Cultural rights in the language of human rights.
Negative Rights Examples: The rights normally impose a duty on every 
individual as a moral and legal obligation to refrain from causing injury to the exercise 
Claim Rights and Liberty Rights
Positive And Negative Rights
15
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
of the right of other person. Right to freedom of speech and expression, right to life 
and liberty, right to equality, right to property, right to be heard right to speedy trial and 
justice, right to worship, freedom of religion, right to legal remedy etc. are referred to as 
Civil and Political Rights in the UDHR.
Individual rights mean the rights that belong to an individual alone. These rights 
are mainly political, economic, or legal in nature. These rights can be exercisable by 
individuals to enjoy their life and liberty without any interference of anybody 
including the state. However, the individual rights have positive and negative elements. 
Positive element obligates a person to discharge the right according to law . The 
negative element prohibits any act that is not permitted  by law .
Group Rights means rights that are enjoyed by a group and as well as 
individually. For example, the rights of disabled persons are considered as group 
rights. They promote the rights of the disabled as a group. At the same time, an 
individual disabled person also could claim the rights independently of the group.   
From the above brief discussion, a right may be defined as something that one 
possess to exercise  either naturally, legally, or socially  with a moral/legal  duty to act 
without violating the right of others. Accordingly, a right has five elements in it. They 
are:
1. A right holder  ( which the subject of a right) has claim to
2. Some substance of it ( the object of right)
3. Which he or she may assert, demand, enjoy or enforce (exercising a right)
4. Against some individual or group ( the bearer of the correlative duty)
5. Citing in support of his or her claim on  some particular ground (the justification 
of a right)
Universal rights means rights that every individual would able to exercise their 
freedoms irrespective of their country of origin, residence freely without any 
interference by the state or any other person subject to legal limitations. These rights 
Individual and Group Rights
To exercise a right at least two persons are necessary and the claim that they want to 
exercise should have a legal basis to justify in the eyes of  law.
Universal Rights
16
promote the dignity and the worth of an individual at all times. Hence, they impose 
obligations on every state to protect and promote the dignity and the freedom of 
individuals without any discrimination as to race, sex, language, or religion. Since 
these rights are the minimal in the life of an individual, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, the 
former President of USA in his joint address to the US Congress on January 6,1941 
advocated freedom of speech, freedom of worship, freedom from fear and freedom 
from want as the basic principles for the worth and dignity of an individual. 
Basing on the above principles,  the ideology of freedom of the individual 
advocated for many centuries. The United Nations in its Charter adopted on October 
24, 1945 recognized human rights as a part and parcel of international law . 
Accordingly, the concept of human rights took their birth in international law . They in 
turn impose an obligation on every state to promote them without any discrimination. 
These rights have been further elaborated through the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights adopted on December 10, 1948. Though there exists a difference of 
opinion about the Universality of human rights between political philosophers and 
scholars of international law , in view of their wide acceptance by 193 member states of 
the United Nations, they are no doubt constituted as universal rights.  
A right is that which a man demands from others justifiability. A responsibility is 
that which makes a man accountable to his actions and consequences of his actions 
and conduct. A right can be moral, ethical, legal or social or cultural. Rights are treated 
as moral when they are natural i.e. enhance the existence.  A rational right is justifiable 
and not emotive. A right has to be based on reasons and it has to be always general.
The word obligation commonly refers to as a synonym of duty or vice-versa. 
However, strictly speaking there exists a difference between the two. According to H.L.A. 
Hart, duty and obligation are distinct to each other. A right exists without any 
correspondence to   an obligation incurred or created, at times. Whereas duty arises from 
position, status, role. This means every time a duty has a connection with the position of 
person, which is linked with right. Hence, an obligation may not correspond to a duty at 
all times. It is only usage or practice of  referring to right as a synonym of duty . In the  eyes 
of law they are different, and especially in the area of rights.
(B) 
Definitional differences between Obligation and Duty
Nature and Concept of Duties
17
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
Concept of Duty
The above distinction is described by a simple example :
A invited his friend X to a dinner party. X promised him that he would attend 
without fail. However, X did not attend the party. In this case, X has an obligation to go 
to the dinner party. But by not attending, he has not either violated or breached the 
right of A.  
If a person occupies a job in an office or an organization he has, a duty to 
discharge all the legal work associated with the job, whether he likes it or not.
One may wonder why then the concept of obligation and duty are referred to as 
synonyms. This may be due to the fact that political, social, or moral obligations need 
to be fulfilled or discharged, which are moral in character are also considered as duties 
many a times. 
For example, a person should not tell a lie at any point of time. However, in a 
given circumstance by revealing a truth, which may affect the life of a person, he may 
tell a lie, though he has a duty to speak the truth. Due to this type of interchanges 
between laws that are moral and legal, the word duty is equivalent to `obligation' or 
`ought'. On this point, there exists a vast literature in both philosophy and legal fields. 
The skeletal difference that exists between the two was analysed in the ancient 
philosophy of India on the basis of Dharma, which encompasses both moral and legal 
duties to be discharged by all without any deviance.
As discussed above, normally, duty is linked with `obligation'. The concept of 
duty arises from fulfillment of a requirement. Duties arise in several ways and means, 
such as moral duties, legal duties, parental duties, societal duties, and civil duties etc. 
However, from the point of view of law , duties arise from legal norms or requirements. 
They have to be discharged, the way it was prescribed. Accordingly, the actions 
constitute as right or wrong basing on the discharge of duty. If one acts contrary to a 
duty, it constitutes a wrong. (For example, a legal norm tells us not to speak ill of others 
which will affect their decency, if speaks ill of others, it constitutes as wrong.). A duty 
imposes an obligation to respect the rights of others and the society. Hence, rights and 
duties are reciprocal. A right is demand and a duty is an expectation.
18
The different types of duties
(A) Natural and Acquired Duties  
(B) Positive and Negative Duties
(C) Perfect and Imperfect Duties
Duties may be distinguished between (1) natural and acquired duties, (2) positive 
and negative duties, (3) perfect and imperfect duties and (4) prima facie and all things 
considered as duties. 
Natural duties bind all of us without any specification by any institution or body. 
Each one of us discharge these duties voluntarily.  For example: not to harm others, 
not to tell lies, not to misuse the freedoms, duty to respect others, not to injure the 
innocent, not to beat children, to uphold truth and justice, etc. 
Acquired duties are duties undertaken by individuals by virtue of something 
they have done, or as a particular relationship, which they might have with others.  
This means, certain duties are legal, and need to perform the acquired obligations 
basing on one's willingness. If refused to perform after consented to discharge, it 
attracts legal consequences. 
Another type of acquired duties results from special relationships that 
individuals undertake as groups, often referred to as responsibilities. For example, 
parents discharging their duties towards their children, doctors to patients, and lawyers 
to their clients. These duties assumed by individuals to exercise automatically by 
accepting to act in a specific role.
According to another legal jurist John Rawls, positive duties require us to do 
good. On the other hand, negative duties impose restrictions on doing bad or refraining 
from acting. Helping the poor may be a positive duty, which may not have any 
obligation. However, not to tell lies or not to harm others is a negative duty, which 
imposes an obligation.
Perfect and Imperfect duties appear similar to that of the positive and negative 
duties. According to Prof Immanuel Kant, a German philosopher, they are not similar.  
Perfect duties expect individuals to discharge the incurred obligations as per the goal 
that is set at all times without any deviation. Imperfect duties have no rigidity. 
Imperfect duties are duties that are never completed in its true spirit. The performance 
of these duties depends on circumstances.  According to Kant, it is difficult to cultivate 
one's own talent is an example for imperfect duty.
19
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
(D) Prima facie and all things considered duties
Declaration on the Rights and Responsibility of  Individuals, Groups and Organs of  Society 
to Promote and Protect Universally Recognized Human Rights and Fundamental 
Freedoms.  It is also known as Valencia Declaration of  Responsibilities and Human Duties.
Rights and protections accorded to human rights defenders
According to W . D. Ross, people mostly discharge their duties to live up to their 
promises as a goodwill. This means, many a times people perform their duties basing 
on the advantages and disadvantages. This being the primary concept of duty, Ross 
calls individuals to be rational in discharging their duties in a proper manner without 
harming the interests of others.   
 Human Rights have the above duty perceptions in its philosophy.  To eradicate 
the present day maladies, and to improve the moral and ethical standards among 
individuals as beneficiaries and defenders of human rights, we have to discharge the 
duties  advocated by human rights sincerely. 
In this regard, the UN High Commissioner of Human Rights while celebrating 
the 50th anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 
1998 in the city of Valencia in Spain under the auspices of UNESCO adopted a 
The shifting of formal equality to substantial equality and the continuous 
violations of human rights by the actors (both the states and individuals) across the 
World, a number of Noble Laureates and scholars requested the UN to adopt a 
declaration highlighting the duties of mankind. In order to provide a legal base for the 
declaration, the General Assembly adopted a declaration on Responsibilities and 
duties of mankind in 1999.
The Principles of the Declaration summarized into different heads as follows:
The Declaration provides specific protections to human rights defenders, 
including the rights:
To seek the protection and realization of human rights at the national and 
international levels; 
To conduct human rights work individually and in association with others; 
To form associations and non-governmental organizations; 
To meet or assemble peacefully; 
To seek, obtain, receive and hold information relating to human rights; 
m
m
m
m
m
20
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
To develop and discuss new human rights ideas and principles and to advocate 
their acceptance; 
To submit to governmental bodies and agencies and organizations concerned 
with public affairs criticism, and proposals for improving their functioning, and 
to draw attention to any aspect of their work that may impede the realization of 
human rights; 
To make complaints about official policies and acts relating to human rights and 
to have such complaints reviewed; 
To offer and provide professionally qualified legal assistance or other advice and 
assistance in defence of human rights; 
To attend public hearings, proceedings and trials in order to assess their 
compliance with national law and international human rights obligations; 
To unhindered access to and communication with non-governmental and 
intergovernmental organizations; 
To benefit from an effective remedy; 
To the lawful exercise of the occupation or profession of human rights defender; 
To effective protection under national law in reacting against or opposing, 
through peaceful means, acts or omissions attributable to the State that result in 
violations of human rights; 
To solicit, receive and utilize resources for protecting human rights (including the 
receipt of funds from abroad). 
According to the Declaration, States have a general responsibility to implement 
and respect all the provisions of the Declaration. However, some of the provisions 
make particular reference to the role of States and indicate that each State has a 
responsibility and duty:
To protect, promote and implement all human rights; 
To ensure that all persons under its jurisdiction are able to enjoy all social, 
economic, political and other rights and freedoms in practice; 
The Duties of States
21
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
To adopt such legislative, administrative and other steps as may be necessary to 
ensure effective implementation of rights and freedoms; 
To provide an effective remedy for persons who claim to have been victims of a 
human rights violation; 
To conduct prompt and impartial investigations of alleged violations of human 
rights; 
To take all necessary measures to ensure the protection of everyone against any 
violence, threats, retaliation, adverse discrimination, pressure or any other 
arbitrary action as a consequence of his or her legitimate exercise of the rights 
referred to, in the Declaration; 
To promote public understanding of civil, political, economic, social and 
cultural rights; 
To ensure and support the creation and development of independent national 
institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights, such as 
Ombudsmen or Human Rights Commissions; 
To promote and facilitate the teaching of human rights at all levels of formal 
education and professional training. 
The Declaration emphasizes that everyone has duties towards others and within 
the community and encourages us, all to be human rights defenders. It is the duty of 
every one of us to promote human rights, to safeguard democracy and its institutions 
and not to violate the human rights of others. It further emphasizes the role of 
professionals and practitioners, especially that of Police officers, Lawyers and Judges 
as defenders of the Human Rights.
The resolution also imposes a responsibility on the states to implement these 
principles and promote them by adopting appropriate legislations. Accordingly, each 
country is responsible to enact appropriate legislation to incorporate the duties of the 
citizens. The Indian Constitution has already incorporated the duties through the 
42nd Amendment Act in 1976, well in advance before the adoption of the Declaration. 
The Responsibilities of Everyone
The Role of National Law
22
The Valencia declaration is a significant one in the annals of human duties for 
the promotion of human rights and protection by all the actors. The Final Version of 
the Declaration is available at (tercermilenio@valenciatercermilenio.org and 
http://www .valenciatercermilenio.org)
       
Every individual has duties towards the society or state. According to the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the duties of each person towards the State 
are:
To obey the law and other legal commands of the state and its agencies in a 
country.
To render the services in civil and military affairs whenever required by the state 
for its defense. 
To cooperate with the state and the community with respect to social security 
and welfare to the extent possible.
To pay the taxes established by law for public purposes.
To Protect the property and culture of the state.
Not to discriminate or advocate anything on communal, linguistic and religious 
or any other ground that affect the liberty of other individuals.
To respect the women, children, wounded, sick, and elderly persons.
Rendering charitable work through social service, education, religious activities, 
cultural activities etc.
To respect the rights and responsibilities of others.
Not to make false allegations or complaints against others.
Not to misuse the laws and regulations.
Not to discriminate or advocate anything on communal, linguistic and religious 
or any other ground that affect the liberty of other individuals. 
To follow and obey the moral and ethical values that belongs to each society.
Impact of Duty on the Society
The duties towards society are:
m
m
m
m
m
m
 
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
23
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
There are innumerable duties that an individual has towards state and the 
society. The above stated few are only illustrative in nature. The strict adherence of the 
duties prescribed by each state and society alone contributes for the sustainable 
development. In the modern context, many people think of their rights without 
acknowledging that they have a duty to protect the rights of others. This degradation 
of duty perspective has brought in a number of upheavals in the contemporary area. If 
people are duty conscious, automatically the country and its institutions also follow 
the duties without any deviance. The sincere practice of duties and exercise of rights 
certainly will create a society or state that is tension and problem free.
(Please read Unit I, and link the concepts 
of value with duty.) Actions of an individual 
are based on choices and behaviour, duty being 
one of the main components of value system, it 
inculcates a number of values in individuals. 
As we have examined above the number of 
duties and rights, and their relationship, duty 
certainly constitute as a core value to regulate 
the moral, ethical, and social behavior of 
individuals. From ancient to modern times,
a number of scriptures, statesmen, and religious texts of various faiths have advocated 
duty based value system, to regulate unnecessary temperaments of individuals and to 
promote a healthy society or state. Hence, discharge of our moral and legal duties 
alone could bring in harmony and helps to realise the guarantees of human rights fully 
in promoting life, liberty, and equality. 
Accordingly reposing its faith on duties, the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights through Article, 29 (2) clearly impose duties of public and moral character to be 
exercised by individuals before claiming their rights and freedoms for the promotion 
of a welfare state or society. The Article is restated below: 
Duty as a value
“In the exercise of  his rights and freedoms, everyone shall be subject to such 
limitations as are determined by law solely for the purpose of  securing due recognition and 
respect for the rights and freedoms of  others and of  meeting the just requirements of  
morality, public order and the general welfare in a democratic society.”
24
The above  brief  discussion clearly signifies that duty constitute the first basic 
value of an individual to be exercised at all times without any deviation before 
expecting the rights to be protected or realised.
The above picture was developed by the Sathya Sai Insitute to inculcate human 
values to youth. The aim of the picture is to develop the necessity of interdependence 
and to highlight the significance of duties that every individual possesses to 
themselves, to others and to society or country.
The two phrases `rights' and `duties' co-exist with each other. In other words, the 
rights and duties are two sides of the same coin, to regulate the values and behavioral 
patterns of an individual. On one side, rights are important in developing the human 
personality and behavior. The duties on the other hand, direct the individuals  
importance of their contribution for the promotion of social good. In a way duty 
targets at the realization of rights guaranteed by various laws and regulations both 
nationally and internationally. The same philosophy applies to states also to discharge 
their duties towards their citizens. The increasing number of violations by states in 
protecting the rights of the individuals across the World has led the United Nations 
and other organs of the world community including the civil societies to focus more on 
the duties than on the rights in the contemporary era. 
According to Prof Harold J. Laski the inter relationship between rights and a 
duties are as follows:
This means every right of an individual automatically impose a duty on 
others. For example, the right to freedom to move freely or privacy impose 
a duty on others not to interfere with the right of movement or privacy of 
any body, except regulated by law .  
This implies that every exercise of right is subject to restrictions. For 
example, one has freedom of speech and expression. However, at the same 
time, everyone has to bear in mind that the exercise of free speech and 
expression in no way affects the rights of others or their life, liberty or 
dignity of others. 
Inter Relationship between Rights and Duties
(a) One's right implies the other's duty .
(b) One's right implies one's duty to recognise similar rights of others.
25
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
If any person tries to misuse the rights, which affect the rights of others or 
of the society or state, the Government has a duty to take appropriate legal 
action to prevent such acts. For example, if a person tries to abuse his right 
to freedom of speech and expression by indulging in spreading wrong 
aspects about a section of people or of a particular religion, the state can 
take legal action. Any such action by the state is justified.    
State being a nucleus organ need to take care of the social and legal 
interests of all the individuals.  It is normally expected by everyone as 
stated above, to support the state in all its legal endeavours.
The above discussion in this unit clearly brings out the significance and the types 
of rights that individuals possess in a society. It also focuses on the importance of 
duties and the inter-relationship that exist between the two.
Rights have different meanings. However, in the eyes of law they are legal and 
moral entitlements, which need to be adhered by everyone.
Right has a legal sanction. Violation of it attracts legal action.
Natural rights guarantees certain fundamental rights to enjoy freely by birth as 
human being. 
Law accords legal rights to individuals to enjoy their rights freely without any 
interference subject to limitations of law .
Claim rights means, a person who can seek a legal remedy for the prevention of 
its violation by others. 
Liberty rights are rights freely exercisable by every individual without a sanction 
or duty on other person. For example Laughing and practicing a religious act
Positive rights are rights otherwise described as dependent rights, which may be 
exercised, on their guarantee by state or society. These are described as 
Economic, Social and cultural rights.
(c) One should exercise his rights for the promotion of social good.
(d) As the State guarantees and protects the rights of everybody , one has a 
duty to support the State.
Summary: 
(A) Rights
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
26
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
Negative rights, which impose a duty on a person to respect the right of another 
person. These rights are civil and political rights. 
Individual rights are economic, political, and legal. They belong to individuals to 
enjoy their freedom and liberty they want to exercise.
Group rights are rights that belong to particular group of people in a society. 
They may often differ from the general rights of others in the society due to 
particular significance given to them.
Universal Rights are rights that belong to people across the World without any 
difference as to race, sex, religion, language, or any other social, economic, 
political, or legal affinity.
There exist a difference between obligation and duty. Obligation arises mostly 
from ethical and moral perspective. Duty arises out of responsibility, which is 
legal in nature.
Natural Duties bind on all of us. Acquired duties are accepted by discharging a 
particular duty.
Positive duties imposes obligations to do good. Negative duties prevent us from 
doing bad things.
Perfect duties expect us to be sincere at all times while discharging any duty. 
Individuals have duties towards state, society and to themselves and to their 
family.
Duty is a value that dictates individuals to perform their moral and legal 
responsibilities at all times for the promotion of good to society and to 
individuals. 
Rights and duties have an inseparable relationship. Adhering to duties is nothing 
but adhering oneself to be dutiful and doing well to society and state. 
(B) Duties
27
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
Model Questions
Write only one word/sentence answer to the questions
Model II
Multiple Choice Questions
1. What is root word of `Right'? 
2. In the modern sense the definition of right is – -------
3. Rights can be divided into how many categories?
4. Duty signifies ------------
5. Duty as a value promotes ----------------
1. What entitlement will be there for a negative right holder? 
2. What is the alternative name for Legal Rights?
3. Natural duties will bind on whom?
4. In which year the General Assembly adopted the resolution recognizing the 
significance of Human Duties?
(A) From the English word `reht'
(A) Long and Decisive
(A) Eight
(A) Legal obligation
(A) Good to society and to individuals
(A) Positive thinking (B) Non-interference (C) Positive Good (D) none of the 
above
(A) Statutory Rights (B) Possessive Rights (C) Passive Rights (D) Corporal rights 
(A) Special people (B) All of us  (C) older people (D) Women 
(A)1998 (B) 1997 (C) 1999 (D) 2000
Answer : (1) B  (2) A (3) B (4)A
28
INTRODUCTION TO TERMINOLOGY OF VARIOUS LEGAL INSTRUMENTS
This Unit will introduce the various terms that are employed in International Law and in 
all its branches including international law of  human rights. So for easy an understanding the 
meaning and functioning of  each of  these words, they have been defined briefly without reference 
to legal technicalities.  
NOTE ON LEGAL INSTRUMENTS
In international law , to regulate the day to day relations between the states, they 
enter into a number of agreements. These agreements establish legal relations between 
states and crystallize the rules of international law to a maximum extent. From the 
evolution of international law till date, numerous agreements have been entered by 
states. However, various instruments entered by states in international relations are 
often used with different names; in general, they are referred to as treaties. The 
different names of the various legal instruments are treaties, covenants, charter, 
conventions, protocol, and declarations.
Before discussing the various types of instruments, for a general understanding 
the following note is very important to know about the procedural aspect of the 
binding nature of these instruments.
In international law , any agreement or treaty negotiated or signed by states will 
not automatically come into force. In the negotiating stage itself, depending upon the 
number of states willing to sign the document, they fix a certain number of states to 
ratify such agreement. Accordingly, after ratification of such number of member 
states, the particular document will come into operation. This means, any legal 
instrument entered in a particular year either may come into effect immediately or may 
take a longer period to come into existence. For example the Vienna Convention on the 
Law of Treaties was adopted by the States in 1969 (it is to be remembered that in 
international law most of the agreements or instruments are named after the place in 
which country it is negotiated or signed). However, it came into effect only in 1980. 
Though an instrument's coming into force maybe another year, it is still linked to the 
year in which it was originally adopted. Even if an instrument has come into existence 
due to ratification, it will be binding only on those states, which have ratified the treaty, 
and not applicable to states who signed. This means, after signature of a treaty, a state 
has to ratify it specifically. At times even if a state ratifies a particular instrument, it 
UNIT III
29
may expressly inform the Secretary General of the United Nations in whose office all 
the treaties are deposited that it is not going to accept all the provisions of the 
agreement and reserving some of them in the agreement. If the request receives the 
acceptance of international community, then its obligations are limited only to such 
provisions for which no reservation is made. This facilitates the states to take care of 
their local interests within the country. For example in the Convention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, popularly referred to as 
CEDA W , the Government of India has reserved a number of provisions stating that if 
it accepts such provisions, it may not be able to pass necessary legislation in municipal 
law , as it would result in disturbing the communal harmony between various religions. 
(The provision for common civil code is one among the main provision reserved by 
India.)         
The term treaty had no exact definition until 1969. In 1969, to develop the legal 
principles and to state the binding nature of legal instruments, a convention was 
adopted namely, Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 1969. According to the 
Convention, a treaty is an international agreement entered between states in a written 
form, regulated by the principles of international law whatever may be title of such 
agreement. The principles of an instrument may be stated in a single document or may 
spread into two or more documents. In case if they are spread into more than one, all 
the documents and principles to be read together for the binding nature of an 
instrument or treaty.  
Bilateral treaty means any agreement entered between two nations confining to 
the matters relating to them with specific interest between them. (For example India 
entered a treaty with USA for the supply of Nuclear energy is a bilateral treaty). These 
treaties will come into force without ratification and reservations. These treaties will be 
in force, till the time the agreement achieves its objects. Once the purpose of the 
agreement is over, the agreement will be terminated by a notification.
Multilateral treaty means an agreement entered by majority of states to establish 
Treaty
Bilateral Treaties  
Multilateral Treaty
30
new principles of international law or codify to accept existing customary norms to 
regulate their multifarious activities.  These treaties are similar to that of legislation of 
a country. These treaties will bring in uniform rules to 
regulate the relations of states. Since the beginning of 
nineteenth century till now , remarkable numbers of 
multilateral agreements have been entered by the states. In 
general, multilateral treaties are referred to as conventions 
or covenants. These treaties impose an obligation on states 
after the completion of technical formalities of signing, 
ratification, to give affect by passing appropriate 
legislation in the country. For example, the TRIPS 
agreement, necessitated the Government of India to enact 
specific legislations or bringing in modifications in the 
existing enactments such as Law of Copyright, Patents 
Act, Trade Marks, and Designs Act etc.
A Convention or Covenant is a multilateral agreement entered by States to   
bring in new norms or to settle existing conflicting norms of international law . A 
Convention may take a long time for the states to adopt into their municipal 
legislations after the technical procedures are completed. At times, they may even 
renegotiate to settle the conflicting issues by entering into bilateral agreements. 
Whereas in the case of covenant, they are bound to implement the norms by enacting 
legislation. The covenants normally deal with the general welfare of the people across 
the world establishing duties on the states to protect the interests of individuals at the 
national level. The Covenants on Civil and Political Rights, Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights have led to every government to give effect to a number of rights and 
duties guaranteed to individual by the States.    
Declaration means a set of principles laid down by an international body or 
organization like the United Nations recognizing the significance of such principles to 
be followed by States. Declaration being primarily policy document which only enlists 
the views of an international organization, it has no legal validity and no binding 
Convention and Covenant 
Declaration
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
31
nature on the States. In order to give effect to such declarations, normally states after 
deliberations to crystallize the principles as binding legal aspects enter into 
conventions or bilateral treaties. For example, the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights adopted by the UN in 1948 later crystallized into Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights and Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights, in 1966.   
 A Protocol is a diplomatic word used in international relations. However, in the 
perspective of international agreements, if any agreement entered into by the states 
parties and later they want to incorporate or remove any provision, they have to adopt 
modifications. These modifications will generally be in written form and need to be 
adopted after all the formalities (such as negotiation, communication, signature, 
ratification, reservation etc.) are completed, and annexed to the main agreement 
(treaty, convention, covenant etc.). Such annexes to the original treaty are referred to as 
Protocol.  In case if a state ratifies a convention, and has not ratified the protocol, then 
such protocol will not be applicable to such states, which have not ratified. For 
example, India signed the Covenant on Civil and Political rights but has not ratified the 
protocols. Accordingly, no Indian citizen can complain to UN Human rights 
Commissioner for the Violation of their rights by the state, if no remedy is available 
nationally. 
In international law , conferences play a vital role. For entering into multilateral 
treaties, the deliberations of the states in a particular area are referred to as 
conferences. At times, a conference may lay down general norms or review the existing 
law and may suggest remedial measures for its effective implementation. For example, 
The World Congress on Human Rights in 1993 introduced a number of principles 
which later led to the adoption of independent conventions, resolutions and 
declarations by the UN on a number of areas. It also recommended for the strict 
promotion of human rights education by all the countries. 
These are normally legal documents adopted by the Security Council, General 
Assembly or by any other body of the United Nations. These resolutions adopted by 
Protocol
Conference
Resolutions
32
the UN are binding upon the states dealing in their relations with each other.
Any legal document or agreement entered by sovereign states defining the 
principles of the functioning, structure, and powers of an international organization is 
referred to as a Charter or Statute.  For example, the Charter of the United Nations; 
Statute of the International Court of Justice, etc. 
Executive orders are such orders issued by the sovereign authority of a state to 
give effect to the agreements that they have entered in. If there exist a contradiction on 
any aspect, they may state the policy of a particular state. These orders also play an 
important source in settling the disputes that arise between states in international law 
of human rights and other areas.
Treaty means an agreement legally binding on the states to regulate their day to 
day relations.
Bilateral treaty is an agreement entered between two states to settle the 
controversial aspects of international law or to lay down norms governing their 
internal relations.
Multilateral treaty means, an agreement entered between several states to 
formulate uniform rules of international law and its branches.
Convention is another type of multilateral agreement, wherein states lay down 
general norms of international law especially under the auspices of an 
international body like the United Nations.  
Covenant is multilateral document enforced under the aegis of an international 
body. After a state signs and ratifies, they are bound to adopt the provisions 
through municipal law to protect the interests of their subjects.
Conference is a diplomatic meeting of states to frame new norms to follow by 
states in their day to day relations. 
Protocol is an additional legal instrument entered by states to rectify the defects 
Charter and Statute
Executive Orders
Summary :
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
33
in an existing document or to add additional provisions to an existing agreement.
Charter or Statute is a legal document entered by sovereign states to define the 
structure, powers, and functions of an international organ.
Resolutions are legal documents specifying or directing states to follow with a set 
of legal norms. 
Executive orders are orders passed by Head of a state laying down their internal 
policy matters on international law .  
A) (Legal document)
A)  Executive orders  
A) Covenants
A)  False
A) Ratification.
(A)  Document (B) Note (C) Occasional paper  (D) Legal Agreement 
(A) Internal Policies (B) External policies (C) International Law
(D) Technical Details 
(A) States (B) Subjects of International law (C) International Organs (D) None 
of the above
(A) International norms (B) Human Rights (C) International Organs
(D) A particular Body of an International Organization
m
m
m
Multiple Choice Questions
(Model - I) One word answer
1) A charter is a   -------------------
2) What is the  internal policy formulations declared by a state are referred to as? 
3) Which type of agreement in general impost an obligation on states to carry 
the principles of it in municipal law?
4) All Agreements are constitute as treaties in international law . Is the 
statement true or false?
5) After what technicality an international agreement will be binding on a 
state?  
(Model - II)
1) What is the meaning of a treaty?
 2) With what Executive orders deal?
 3)  Who adopts resolutions in international law?
 4)  With what a charter deals?
Answers : 1) D 2) A 3) C 4)C
34
UNITED NATIONS AND HUMAN RIGHTS
This Unit introduces to  the reader with a brief  legal evolution and the significance of  
human rights in international arena. It will further describe various provisions of  the Charter of  
the United Nations, which are concerned with human rights. It will then highlight the steps taken 
by the UN in drafting the Universal Declaration of  Human Rights and introduce the objectives 
of  the preamble. It then proceeds to examine each Article with explanation to UDHR.  
An Overview of UN System
The basic object of international law since its origin has been to establish peace 
and security on the globe and to help mankind to lead a life with liberty, equality, and 
freedom from the atrocities. In order to achieve this objective, the officials of nation-
states have laid their emphasis to protect the rights of mankind. Accordingly, the 
international legal policy started emphasizing on the promotion and protection of 
human rights universally without any kind of discrimination on grounds of sex, 
religion, race etc. This philosophy ultimately became the corner stone not only of all 
the branches of international law and the international community, but that of the 
states in their  Domestic Laws. 
After the World War II, the victorious powers (popularly referred to as Allied 
powers, namely, the US, UK, China, France, and former USSR) have taken the 
innitiative to end the wars in future and to settle any disputes by peaceful means. This 
concept resulted in number of conferences, wherein the future nations and peoples of 
the world could have their confidence and live with utmost liberty and dignity. 
Accordingly, they decided to establish an organisation, which could provide the 
required legal regulation of the states on the basis of their participation. The name 
`United Nations' was suggested for the future organisation, by the Former US 
President Franklin D Roosevelt, in 1942. According to him, United Nations represents 
a symbol of Unity of Independent Nations and their people who united to achieve 
peace forever and to give away the concept of war. This concept of Roosevelt received 
widespread recognition by other major countries. Accordingly, they established the 
United Nations in 1945.  
Various movements which started from centuries back for the recognition of the 
rights of men and women, received widespread recognition especially, in the western 
world. However, the independent recognition by states in their constitutions had not 
UNIT IV
35
given the much required acknowledgement in the 
international arena. After the Second World War, the 
member states, while discussing on the establishment of 
United Nations seriously 
thought that in order to have 
similar rights of man across the 
world. Accordingly, after long 
deliberations, the words human rights took birth in 
international law with the adoption of the Charter of the 
United Nations on October 24, 1945. 
United Nations Organization has Six Principal organs, namely;
The General Assembly is composed of all the 
State parties' members to the United Nations. The 
present strength of the UN is 193. The Assembly 
meets once in a year normally in September. The 
president of each session is elected every year by the 
member states. The General Assembly is authorized 
by the Charter to oversee the various aspects relating 
to human rights.
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
UNITED 
NATIONS ORGANISATION
Trusteeship Council
(Suspended operations-1994
with the independence of Palau )
General Assembly
Secretariat 
International Court of Justice
Security Council
Economic & Social Council
36
SECURITY COUNCIL
SECRETARIAT
The Security Council is the main body 
responsible for the maintenance of peace and 
security. It has a total strength of 15 out of which 
five are permanent members (U.K., USA, France, 
Russia, and China) and 10 non-permanent 
members elected for every two years basing on 
geographical representation. The Security 
Council is highest body, whose decision is final on any matter. To receive any decision 
for implementation it requires at least a majority of 10 votes.  The President of the 
Council rotates every month between the 15 States in alphabetical order. The 
representatives of members states should always be available in New York to facilitate 
the council to meet as and when it is necessary. 
The United Nations has a secretariat to coordinate with the entire work of all the 
organs of the UN. It functions under a Chief Administrative Officer referred to as 
Secretary General. The term of Office of the Secretary General is five years. It can be 
extendable indefinitely for any number of terms. However, no Secretary General has 
worked more than two terms. The Secretary General is appointed by the General 
Assembly on the recommendations of the Security Council. The Secretary General 
also normally elected on the basis of geographical rotation. The Secretariat provides 
for studies, information, and facilities needed by United Nations bodies for their 
meetings. The Secretariat is the depository for all the Legal Instruments entered by the 
states. It carries the work as directed by the organs of the UN. 
The present Secretary General is from South Korea. He was elected in 2007 and 
is also reappointed for a second term which will start from 2012. Till date the following 
people served as secretary generals of the UN. 
mGladwyn Jebb  Oct 24, 1945 to Feb, 1946 as an adhoc Secretary General from 
UK.
mTrygve Lie, February 1946-10 Nov 1952; Norway ( Resigned)
mDag Hammarskjold, 10 April 1953-18 September 1961, Sweden (Died in Plane 
Crash)
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
37
m
m
m
m
m
m
ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL
Trusteeship Council
U Thant, 30 November 1961-31 December 1971, Burma
Kurt Waldheim, 1 January 1972-31 December 1981 Austria
Javier Perez de Cuellar, 1 January 1982-31 December 1991, France
Boutros Boutros-Ghali ,1 January 1992- 31 December 1996, Egypt
Kofi Annan, 1 January 1997-31 December 2006 Ghana
Ban Ki-moon, 1 January 2007 onwards, South Korea
The Economic and Social Council is one 
of the principal organs of the UN. It is 
responsible for the work of the Economic and 
Social affairs of the bodies of the UN. It has 54 
states as its members. They are elected by the 
General Assembly for three year term. The 
election of the States is based on geographical 
distribution of regions of the world. It meets 
once in a year. This is the main body mostly 
looks after the affairs of the Human Rights and recommends to the UN bodies.
Trusteeship council's objective is to promote 
harmonious relations among the people of dependent 
territories and to make the territories independent. 
This council was established to administer the best 
interests of the people in the territories under mandates by the 
League of Nations or territories taken from nations after 
Second World War.  After 1945 it was entrusted to see and to 
protect the interests of the people of the colonies. It has successfully achieved its object 
in decolonizing all the territories and in enhancing the rights of the people of those 
territories entrusted to it. Among the major success of it is in the African region, where 
it could secure decolonization of several territories from the colonial masters. 
(Trusteeship means any country that is dependent on another country, for its 
38
economic, social, and cultural development. It was established in order to look after 
needs of the dependent country under the responsibility of international community 
where more transparent development will be there, than under the rule of the main 
country to administrating the activities of its dependent country). The Council had 
achieved the objectives of promotion of economic, social, cultural aspects of those 
territories (11 non self governing territories) that entrusted to it to become independent 
countries. Palau or Pelew was the last trust territory that became the independent 
Republic in 1994 under the purview of Trust territory. As a result, as of now , there is no 
single country under trusteeship. Hence, the Council has no role to play. However, the 
UN system still retains and plans to use its activities in future trusteeships if any come 
under its purview or may employ its activities to achieve all round development of 
human rights in underdeveloped countries with its experience.
The ICJ is the main Judicial Organ of the UN. It is situated in the Peace Palace at 
The Hague in the Netherlands. It settles the disputes submitted by the States and 
renders advisory opinion to the United Nations. The Court consists of 15 judges 
elected for a nine year term by the UN. The election takes place every three years, 
basing on the retirement of one third of judges. The President of the Court is elected by 
the judges.   
The chart at the end of book clearly specifies the mandate of human rights law 
and the specific bodies that work in realizing them through nation states. 
International Court of Justice (ICJ)
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
39
Provisions of the UN Charter dealing with Human Rights 
 The preamble of the United Nations, as discussed above, declared its aim to 
wipe out the fear of war, the promotion of human rights and the worth of human 
person and dignity of mankind. It also seeks to establish justice, and promotes 
corporation between the States to discharge their duties to create a just economic, 
social and cultural order wherein mankind can realize the fundamental human rights 
in accordance with the principles of international law . Accordingly, a number of 
provisions of the Charter have incorporated human rights. They are as follows:
1. Article 1 of the Charter lays down the purposes of the United Nations. 
Accordingly, it is one of the duties of the UN as a world body to take necessary 
steps to achieve international co-operation in order to reduce the inequalities of 
economic, social, and cultural aspects. It also  oversees to promote and encourage 
the nation-states to respect the human rights of man and the promotion of all the 
fundamental freedoms without any distinction to race, sex, language or religion.
2. Article 8 lays down that the UN shall place no restriction on the eligibility of men 
and women to participate in any capacity equally in its principal and subsidiary 
organs. According to the provisions of this article, all persons of the world are 
eligible to join the UN and serve in its jobs as per the qualifications prescribed for 
each post. These jobs, the internships, and various projects that are available with 
UN are open to all without any discrimination to race, sex, language or any other 
ground.   
3.  According to Article 13, to achieve the purposes and objectives of the Charter, 
especially with respect to the promotion of Human Rights, the General Assembly 
(since the General Assembly represents all the nations), it has been entrusted with 
the task of taking harmonized steps in the promotion of human rights of 
economic, social, cultural, educational and fundamental freedoms.    
4. According to Article 55, it is the responsibility of the United Nations to take all 
necessary legal steps to promote peace and cooperation between the member 
countries to attain higher standards of living, full employment and the promotion 
economic and social progress;
(a) To suggest solutions to help the states to achieve internationally 
economic, social, health, education, and cultural relations of a high 
standard; and
(b) To promote universal respect for human rights without any 
discrimination on any grounds whatsoever.
40
To achieve the objectives stated in the Article 55, the member states established 
the Economic and Social Council as one of the significant organs of the United 
Nations, in order to assist the General Assembly in realizing the protection and 
promotion of human rights.
5. According to Article 76, the member states established a Trusteeship Council as 
another principal organ.
6. The above are the most important objectives of UN to achieve the fundamental 
freedoms of human beings across the globe. According to Article. 7 the UN will 
have six principal organs as discussed above. The function of all the organs is to 
carry out the duties towards the nation-states, which includes the promotion of 
human rights as their principal duty.  
7. If any country disobeys the mandate, especially in the promotion and protection 
of human rights, or if any country is under threat from another country, the 
Security Council is empowered to take all necessary steps including even to 
declare a war to achieve peace and security, which includes the promotion and 
protection of human rights. (Article 51)
8.  Apart from the above, in accordance with Article 55, the Security Council may 
direct the regional organizations ( like European Union, SAARC etc., these 
organizations are established by member states of the UN to settle their internal 
differences or to promote their relations that are specific to their region only). 
The aim of these organizations is to assist the UN and to achieve the economic, 
social, cultural aspects and fundamental freedoms of each region quickly and to 
resolve the differences between them at the regional level.
After the establishment of the United Nations, in 
order to discharge its commitment for the promotion of 
Human rights it has established a small committee of 
nine members on February 15, 1946 to take steps for the 
preparation of an International Bill of Human Rights. 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights: Technical Background
Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt, the wife of Former US President looking at the 
Declaration as one of the chief Architect  and 
Chairperson of the Drafting Committee of the 
UDHR.    
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
41
In April that year, Mrs. Roosevelt was appointed as its chairperson. Immediately, 
after the constitution, the committee had its preliminary meeting and suggested for the 
increase of the members, which was increased to eighteen. (The representatives of the 
following countries were appointed. They were Australia, Belgium, Byelorussia of 
Soviet Socialist Republic, Chile, China, Egypt, France, India, Iran, Lebanon, Panama, 
Philippines, United Kingdom, United States, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, 
Uruguay, and Yugoslavia). On June 21, 1946, the Economic and Social Council 
framed the terms of reference on which the committee needed to work for the drafting 
of the Universal Declaration.
After the terms of reference to prepare a universal text for the promotion and 
protection of human rights, the committee later converted into the Commission on 
Human Rights, which functioned till 2006. This was later converted into a permanent 
inter governmental body known as Human Rights Council, in 2006 by the General 
Assembly. At present, the strength of the council is 47 states.
The Commission on Human Rights after deliberations appointed, Mr. John 
Peters Humphrey of Canada as the drafting committee chairman. John Humphrey 
prepared the first draft of the universal text. After that Mr. Rene Cassin, a French 
Professor of Law and Judge prepared the final version of the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights [UDHR] with 30 Articles on the model of the Napoleon code. In 1968, 
he received the Noble Peace Prize for drafting the UDHR. 
After the final version of the Draft, the General Assembly had finally adopted the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights on December 10, 1948. Since then, 
December 10 is celebrated as Human Rights day to mark the Universal Declaration 
and the Fundamental Freedoms of human beings, which were recognized universally 
without any discrimination as to race, religion, sex, language and culture. However, 
since the declaration has no legal validity and binding nature on the states under 
international law , the UN asked the Commission to take further steps to convert it into 
two seperate legal texts. Further, the Declaration being a mixture of both Civil and 
Political Rights; Economic, Social and Cultural rights in one single text, it would be 
dificult for the states to impliment them.
On this suggestion, the Commission and the various committees after a 
considerable laborious work finally prepared the blue print of two texts. These are 
titled as Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and Covenant on Civil 
and Political Rights, which have been adopted in 1966 and came into force in 1976. 
The First covenant has been ratified by 160 states, and 167 (till July 2011) ratified the 
42
Second one. Later both the covenants have been added with additional protocols. 
The Civil and Political Rights are referred to as justiciable rights, which are 
equivalent to the Fundamental Rights of the Constitution of India. The Economic, 
Social and Cultural rights are referred to as  Non-Justiciable rights, and  are only 
directives to the states which need to be promoted and implemented depending upon 
various  factors (these are comparable to the Directive Principles of State Policy as 
framed by the Constitution which are directives to the State. These rights normally, 
can't be challenged in a court of law for their non-implementation. However, in the 
recent past, at least more than two decades, the Supreme Court of India in no 
uncertain terms made it clear through a number of judgments; if the non-justiciable 
rights have a substantive bearing on the enjoyment of fundamental rights, their non-
implementation can be challenged). 
The Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights has an optional 
Protocol adopted in 2008. This protocol allows individuals to complain to the 
International Human Rights Mechanism of the UN for the non-implementation of 
the provisions of the Charter by the States parties. This is a historic Protocol. For the 
first time, it has permitted the individuals to complain against their states, even in the 
case of non-implementation of the provisions of the non-justiciable rights, which are 
addressed only to States. The complaint  may be made to UN High Commissioner on 
Human Rights, only after the exhaustion of local remedies including the highest 
court's judgments.   The protocol is signed by 36 states, and ratified by 3 states. This has 
not yet entered into force. Since this is a radical Protocol, certainly it will take time for 
states to accept their responsibility to discharge towards their people.
The Covenant on Civil and Political Rights has two protocols. The first one was 
adopted in 1966 and came into force in 1976. This protocol guarantees to the 
individual citizens to complain to the UN any violation of their civil and political 
rights by their state, after completing all the formalities and exhausting the remedies 
including the decision of the Supreme Court. (This right is guaranteed to the people of 
those countries, which ratified the Protocol. Government of India has not yet ratified; 
the Indian citizens cannot make any complaint) It has been ratified by 114 fourteen 
states till July 2011.
The Second Protocol was adopted in 1989 and came into force in 1991. It 
received 73 ratifications by states parties as on July 2011. This Protocol abolishes death 
penalty as a deterrent criminal punishment. Government of India is not a party to this 
protocol.
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
43
Significance of the UDHR
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
The Charter of United Nations aim is to protect the Human Rights and freedoms 
of the individuals at the International level. In order to implement the mandate of the 
States, the UN adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The Declaration 
is nothing but an extension of the ideology of what states parties have conceived in the 
Charter.  
The adherence to the Declaration in true spirit will bring peace and security.
The Declaration with its non-binding nature has received universal recognition 
without any exception and accepted by the whole international community.
All the states - even the communist countries (like former USSR, former 
Yugoslavia) - which were skeptical in the beginning, gradually realized the 
significance and started defending the declaration. 
The regular reference to the Declaration and the development of the provisions 
later crystallized into Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and the adoption of independent texts on 
various aspects of human rights. All these texts conferred the status on the 
declaration as a part of customary international law . 
The Declaration became an extension of the Charter of the United Nations. On 
Several Occasions, the  various organs of the UN including the Security Council 
and the General Assembly quoted its provisions  in a number of resolutions and 
documents.
The World Conference on Human Rights held at Vienna in 1993 made 
references to the UDHR and paid its tributes to it.
The States parties (especially the developing states, several times made a mention 
of their rights and the rights of their people in various areas of cooperation and 
concession of varied aspects of law by the developed states) advanced their 
claims basing on the provisions of the Declaration.
The International Court of Justice and the municipal courts (especially the 
highest court of a country) in a number of cases made significant references to 
UDHR in their decisions, led for wide judicial recognition.
In 1978 on its 30th anniversary, 84 States paid tributes to the Declaration in the 
Teheran conference of Human Rights.
44
m
m
Analysis of the Declaration: 
As a mark of respect to the declaration and its principles, the UN crystallized its 
millennium goals basing on the unfulfilled dreams of it. These goals will drive 
the states to discharge their responsibilities to accomplish the standards they 
themselves set in the declaration.
The extensive recognition and respect given to the declaration universally, and 
celebration of December 10 every year by the World Community led scholars to 
term it as the Magna Carta of the World, in upholding the rights and 
fundamental liberties of the individuals. 
The declaration contains a preamble and 30 Articles. The preamble specifies the 
objectives and the Articles deal with  Civil and Political Rights, Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights, while a few articles of this declaration deal with the duties to be 
performed by all agents  (this includes the states to render their duties towards other 
states, to their people  and  minimum guarantees to the whole mankind wherever they 
reside. At the same time, impose legal and moral obligations on the society towards 
individual's vis-à-vis individuals towards society and international community). In 
other words, the declaration became the cornerstone of international law to achieve its 
basic aim and object of securing peace and security, the concept of one world and to 
make the world free from the fear of war. 
 This is evident from the fact that though international law gave birth to the 
concept of human rights only six decades ago, in the contemporary era, every branch 
of international law has an influence of human rights. Moreover, in crystallizing new 
norms to regulate the international relations of states, many a times they incorporate 
human rights as the basis. (This is further evident that this declaration, the only 
document officially translated by  UN in more than 360 languages, to help people, to 
practice them easily.)
The continuous adherence and reference to the UDHR on par with the Charter 
of the United Nations by member states made it more than a legally binding 
document. Even new states who come into existence and become members of the UN, 
all of them without any exception have accepted the principles of the Declaration 
along with Charter as new members of the international community. The Declaration 
has paved the way for the independence of many countries in 60's and 70's. 
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
45
Preamble of the Declaration
Whereas recognition of  the inherent dignity and of  the equal and inalienable rights 
of  all members of  the human family is the foundation of  freedom, justice and peace in the 
world.
Whereas disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted in barbarous acts 
which have outraged the conscience of  mankind, and the advent of  a world  in which human 
beings shall enjoy freedom of  speech and belief  and freedom from fear and want has been 
proclaimed as the highest aspiration of  the  common people.
The Preamble of the Declaration states the spirit 
and significance of the Declaration. The picture 
conveys that if the mankind and its creators (namely, 
states) follow the Declaration in true spirit, it is easy to 
achieve peace, security through friendship and 
prosper together. This spirit has been stated in the 
Declaration, and is explained hereunder in a simple and common language for easy 
understanding with some pictures to signify the importance of oneness along with 
commentary to each article.
The mankind as a whole, which includes the states and the international 
community, have the responsibility at all times to promote the natural and inseparable 
personality to uphold the self –respect of every individual without any difference. The 
friendly behavior of mankind alone is the basis for upholding the freedom, justice, and 
peace on the earth. 
The negligence of people, disrespect to the rights of others and the self interest of 
the emperors from ancient to modern times have resulted in a number of wars. This 
type of behavior of few individuals as rulers led to a number of revolutions across the 
world, and mankind went through a number of difficulties, which ultimately 
developed fear in the minds of common man of their existence. They extended respect 
and support to their rulers out of fear than with love and affection. This had brought in 
distance between the rulers and the people. The tyrannical ambitions of the rulers, 
finally led to the evolution of natural rights (see Unit II), which in turn resulted in 
establishing democracy and human rights. The ambition of few vested interests 
relegated the freedoms of individual and resulted in two World Wars. To halt the 
inimical  attitude of few individuals, the world leaders have realized that peace and 
security to mankind could be established only by guaranteeing equal rights to express 
46
their opinions on any issue freely without fear,  and the needs of common man be met 
only by guaranteeing human rights without any discrimination. 
As discussed above, if no person is forced to act against his or her will, the scope 
for coups or wars and social movements will not be there in the World. In other words, 
even in a democratic set up, if any organ of the state or its rulers is not discharging in 
their legal duties and show any tendency towards favoritism or disrespect the rights of 
people, social movements are bound to develop. (For example, the uneven 
development of a country, corruption etc., led for a number of social movements 
across the world).
It is the responsibility of every country to develop harmonious relationship with 
each other. To achieve this fundamental principle, states laid their faith and emphasis 
on international law to regulate their relations in a peaceful manner. The states too 
have duties to respect the territorial integrity, sovereignty of nations and its people 
without resorting to any kind of hatred or discrimination on grounds of race, religion, 
sex, or language.  The harmonious relationship between the states at the international 
level only could lead to establish peace and security.  With that endurance to bring in 
peace and security to mankind, the states have established the UN, and to resolve their 
differences in a friendly manner by employing legally permissible methods. (Normally 
under international law , the disputes or differences are resolved by employing any one 
or all of the methods. These are Negotiation, Mediation, Conciliation, Arbitration or 
Judicial Settlement or by war as a last alternative).
In a plain reading, the rights of the 
individuals and their free exercise, 
depends on the friendly relations 
between nation-states. It is the duty of 
states to be friendly to settle their 
differences and to live in peace, to bloom 
the personal liberties of mankind. To 
achieve this every year, September 21 is celebrated as an international day of peace by 
states popularly known as World Peace Day. 
Whereas it is essential, if  man is not to be compelled to have recourse, as a last resort, 
to rebellion against tyranny and oppression, that human right should be protected by the rule 
of  law.
Whereas it is essential to promote the development of  friendly relations between 
nations.
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
47
As a mark of respect to celebrate the peace day, a peace bell is rung every year at 
the Head Quarters of the United Nations in New York. The bell is cast of coins 
donated by children of all continents with an inscription on its sides read as “Long Live 
absolute World Peace.” The great cricket star of India,  Sachin Tendulkar had donated 
the bell.  For the donation of this bell, Tendulkar is referred to as the reminder of 
human cost of war. Many a times the UN and its organs, and even NGO's around the 
world choose famous personalities in the World and appoint them as Ambassadors of 
peace to promote the ideals of one world and one humanity through the prism of 
human rights. 
The world leaders have given the name United Nations to the international 
organization is a reaffirmation of their concern for peace, friendship, to live with 
dignity and to promote peace and security. The United Nations represents 
togetherness of the people across the world in spite of differences in language, culture 
and other issues that exist between the West and the East. The main concern and idea 
of the leaders by establishing an organization is to make it a true global organization 
symbolizing the spirit of mankind as a single entity, without any difference whatsoever 
it may be. Accordingly, the UN works to  achieve the objectives of the preamble of the 
Declaration in order  to end the miseries of various disadvantaged cross section of 
people like women, minorities, children, disabled, etc., to promote the concept of 
oneness among all. (For the various activities of the UN visit, the UN web site 
Whereas the people of  the United Nations have in the Charter reaffirmed their faith in 
fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of  the human person and in the equal 
rights of  men and women and have determined to promote social progress and better 
standards of  life in larger freedom. Whereas Member States have pledged themselves to 
achieve, in cooperation with the United Nations, the promotion of  universal respect for and 
observance of  human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Whereas a common understanding of  these rights and freedoms is of  the greatest 
importance for the full realization of  this pledge. 
Now therefore, The General Assembly proclaims this Universal Declaration of  
Human Rights as a common standard of  achievement for all peoples and all nations, to the 
end that every individual and every organ of  society, keeping this Declaration constantly in 
mind, shall strive by teaching and education to promote respect for their rights and freedoms 
and by progressive measures, national and international to secure their universal and 
effective recognition and observance, both among the peoples of  Member States themselves 
and among the peoples of  territories and their jurisdiction.
48
http://www .un.org/wotks. In the pages of UN, one could see the various areas 
wherein the UN involved itself through people across the globe to wipe out the tears of 
millions of people on various fronts and to bring them to the main stream of life of the 
international and national societies. The money spent on all these activities is only the 
annual contribution of the member states shows the determination that the states have 
to develop the better standards of life). 
The pictures represent the Eight 
significant Millennium Goals adopted at the end 
of the Millennium in 2000 by the United 
Nations and Members of UN made a pledge to 
achieve them. The eight pictures represent eight 
objectives which need to be achieved by the UN 
by engaging people across the world. For this 
purpose it conducts a number of programmes and offers a variety of internships to 
young students and offers projects for research in every area. Infact the Science and 
Technology field has a broad scope in UN to associate themselves to achieve the 
objectives of the UN. In one sentence, everyone in their field could contribute for a 
better standard of life and be associated with the UN. The pictures below and the 
symbols stand for the goals which are stated:
Goal: 1 Eradicate Extreme Hunger and Poverty
Goal: 2 Achieve Universal Primary Education
Goal: 3 Promote Gender Equality and Women Empowerment
Goal: 4 Reduce Child Mortality
Goal: 5 Improve Maternal Health
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
49
Goal: 6 Combat HIV/AIDS, Malaria and other diseases
Goal: 7 Ensure Environmental Sustainability
Goal: 8 Develop Global partnerships for Development
Article 1 ( Free and Equal in Dignity and Right) :
All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed 
with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of  brotherhood. 
The above eight are the official goals and pictures developed by the UN. To 
monitor the progress of each Goal and the steps to be taken for their betterment, the 
UN recently entered into an agreement with technology giant Google as a partner to 
assist the UN.  
To achieve the objectives of the Charter of the United Nations, the General 
Assembly adopted the Declaration. After the adoption of this declaration and to live 
up to its expectations, international law has underwent a number a changes in its 
approach towards the rights of the states and extending protection to the individuals. 
The progressive codification of International Law of Human Rights, the number of 
conventions, declarations, Covenants, conferences and protocols have had a 
significant impact on the approach of the States and the International Organizations 
including International Monetary Fund and World Bank. However, as there are 
differences and self interests that we human beings are having, the states do have their 
own policy perspective to protect and develop their own people.  To end all kinds of 
discrimination, the UN works to achieve them fully as stated in the Charter and the 
Declaration through the principles of international law . 
A plain reading of the text indicates that all the persons born have equal rights 
and are entitled to dignity and respect without any distinction.  However, from a strict 
socio-legal perspective, it needs an analytical perspective.
From the established political philosophy, all persons born in any society are 
equal in all respects in the eyes of law . No discrimination is permissible to one another 
50
in a society and they need to ensure all types of rights and freedoms, both in the 
international and national legal scenario. However, a close examination of the 
provisions of the Article amply makes it clear, that due to economic, social and 
cultural conditions, the concept of equality has its own restrictions, which are 
legitimate in their exercise. Freedom also has its own limitations. For example, in the 
Indian context, all persons above 18 years of age are entitled to exercise their franchise 
or right to vote without any limitations. There should not be any restrictions on the 
exercise of this right. This may be symbolized as political equality that is recognized 
legally, but depending on their economic situation, the life style of people may vary.
 It is the responsibility of the state to extend concession to the needy sections of 
people of the polity in order to bring them on par with other developed sections in 
terms of socio, economic and cultural perspective. The Millennium goals of the UN 
also try to achieve the minimum economic equality and strive to eliminate poverty. 
This means, though there exist differences on economic, social, and cultural front, in 
the eye of law all the citizens are equal and for the state the potential of every 
individual is the prime concern. The concept of gender equality is also included in this 
article, which places men and women on an equal footing in all walks of life.
Further, the issue of equality does not mean that the mental and physical 
capacities of all the people are one and the same. The development of personality 
depends upon the environment that a person grew up and the conditions in which they 
live. Mental maturity and the intellectual capacities mainly depend upon the 
surroundings in which they live in and the cultural perspectives that they adopt.  It is 
the duty of state, and the international community to provide the basic necessary 
facilities to grow in a friendly atmosphere and strive to increase the earning capacities 
of each individual. In this regard, it is the responsibility of every individual of the 
society to contribute their might for the betterment of all sections of the people. Hence, 
depending on the socio-economic, cultural conditions, a state may frame its policy 
formulations according to the needs of every section of people 
of the society.
The picture brings forth the idea that through love and 
affection alone one can help to achieve equality. Inspite of 
economic, social, psychological, physical inabilities of a 
person, they need to be cared for by the society, and have to be 
treated with love and respect to enable them to fully develop 
their personality. This being the objective, the emphasis of the 
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
51
Article is that, every individual has a duty  to respect the dignity and rights of every 
other person for the progressive development and realization of human rights, which is 
the main thrust of  International Law of Human Rights.  
From the above pictures and the provisions of the Article, no person has lesser 
rights, irrespective of their status for any reason whatsoever may be. This means 
whether a person belongs to a developed, developing, under developed, less developed 
or land locked states (a state without a sea border like Nepal or Bhutan) in 
international law would be treated equally. Further, in international law different types 
of states are recognized, namely, Micro, Macro, Non-Self Governing territories, 
dependent territories; Insurgent and belligerent states (movements where people's 
organizations at times control a territory and defy the sovereignty or people fighting for 
establishing a new country  so on and so forth. This Article's aim is whatever the type 
of government or territory, whether it may be Europe, America, Asia, or Africa, black 
or white, child, young person, women, or man, disabled, minorities, all are equal and 
have equal rights. In the application of law , the international community or a state 
cannot show any kind of discrimination. Further, due to internal problems or for any 
other reason, a person flees from his country to take shelter in another country referred 
as refugee also cannot be shown any discrimination by such country, where in they 
seek shelter. 
Article 2 (Prohibition of discrimination): 
Everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set forth in this Declaration, without 
distinction of  any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other 
opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status.
Furthermore no distinction shall be made on the basis of  the political, jurisdictional or 
international status of  the country or territory to which a person belongs, whether it, be 
independent, trust, non-self  governing or under any other limitation of  sovereignty.  
52
The differences on any of the grounds mentioned in the Article such as race, 
colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, 
property, birth or other status, normally evolves because of lack of basic understanding 
of law and moral values of a society. Due to lack of knowledge and understanding of 
the basic tenets of law , justice, equality, dignity, liberty, ethical, moral, values and rights 
(as discussed in units I & II), makes one to relegate the rights to a secondary position. 
This inturn, will bring in all the differences and miseries. In such cases, it is the duty of 
the international community to provide the mechanism to augment the values, and 
extend the necessary concessions to the extent necessary for their upliftment.
The Article is the briefest one in the entire 
Declaration. However, it is the most important one 
among all the rights. This implies that the international 
community and the states in their constitutions have to 
take the responsibility to provide a life wherein the people 
meet their minimum requirements of life. These are 
especially, food, clothing and shelter. These are the basic 
requirements to lead a life and able to exercise their rights freely. The UN in order to 
provide these necessities adopted a number of steps and legal documents requesting 
the states to follow suit. Nationally, to provide such equality, the Great Son of India, 
namely, Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar  has penned the provisions of the constitution to 
bringig social harmony. A duty has been casted on  the state to discharge its 
responsibility to provide facilities to lead a  life free from all infirmities. This provision 
is continuously interpreted by the Supreme Court of India (Article 21 which is similar 
to the Article 3 of UDHR) with progressive outlook and expanded the fundamental 
rights in a number of cases. 
Extending the provisions of the Article, the UN adopted the Protocol II to Civil 
and Political rights abolishing death penalty. The ideology of the UN behind the 
adoption of this protocol is that since a person is born, no one including law has a right 
to take away the life of an individual under no circumstances. Even if a person 
committed a grave offense, the punishment may be extended to life time imprisonment 
rather than taking away the life of a person. Another important objective of the article 
is that, in case if it comes to knowledge of acourt subsequently that a sentnced person is 
Article 3 (Right to Life, Liberty, and Security): 
Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of  person.  
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
53
innocent, then there won't be any chance to bring back the life of the person. 
Accordinaly, death penalty be abolished even in the rarest of rarer casses. With this 
objective, to stop politics and to try the offences of even former rulers of a country.UN 
has adopted the Rome Statue establishing the International Criminal Court to have an 
independent, impartial trial of the person without any kind of illegal motives of states 
at the cost of life, liberty and security. 
Further in order to achieve life, liberty, and security of person at all times, at the 
national level the UN requested the states to establish National Human Rights 
Commissions in every country to protect them from the violations of human rights.. 
In human history, slavery occupies a special role. It was in existence from ancient 
to modern times. Even in the era of globalization and information technology, of 
contemporary era, slavery is in existance and is in practice in different forms. The main 
forms of slavery are chattel slavery, bonded labour, beggar, human trafficking, and 
forced labour.
Chattel Slavery means, human beings are treated as 
animals and sold in a market like goods. Once a 
person buys another person, as owner, such person 
will have all the rights, and the purchased person had 
to undertake all the jobs entrusted by the purchaser.
 If any person or his family is having 
any debt to any rich person and unable to repay such 
debt, the entire family works for rich man without any 
wages to repay their debt.  
Article 4 (Prohibition of Slavery): 
No one shall be held in slavery or servitude; slavery and the slave trade shall be 
prohibited in all their forms.
Bonded Labour :
54
Human Trafficking: 
Forced Labour: 
It means transporting 
human beings (especially women, children) 
from one country to another country or one 
place to another place for exploiting their 
labour and body for various purposes. 
According to International 
Labour Organisation's (ILO) convention, on Forced Labour, 1932, any work or 
service, which is extracted from any person under the 
threat of penalty, and for extracting the work without 
voluntary consent of such person constitutes forced labour. 
According to statistics of ILO there are about over 12 
million people working as forced labour, in the world.
According to the article prostitution, captivity of children, 
child soldiers, selling women and children due to abject poverty etc, also constitute as  
the modern means of forced labour and slavery.
In order to prevent various forms of forced labour and slavery, in 1926 the 
League of Nations (the predecessor organisation of the United Nations) adopted a 
Convention on prevention of Slavery. Expanding its provisions, the UN in 1956 
adopted a supplementary Convention to it, including the modern means or forms of 
practices, which may lead to slavery.  The UN apart from the conventions on slavery 
adopted a number of other conventions on prostitution, child trafficking, abduction, 
etc, in order to prevent any kind of deprivation of life, liberty, and security to human 
nd
person in any form. The UN declared 2  December, of every year as the anti-Slavery 
day. International law strictly prohibits states to practice any such practice that leads to 
slavery of any kind. Articles 23 & 24 of the Constitution of India prohibits all types of 
slavery and human trafficking in India.
This Article again highlights that until and unless the mankind practices 
sincerely the spirit of common brotherhood in its fullest extent, whatever number of 
legal measures taken at the international and national levels, they remain only on 
paper, and the rights of millions of individuals are nullified. Hence, it is the duty of 
mankind, not to think of one's rights and comfort alone, but to think of the rights of 
others and to extend protection to the extent possible to prevent any act that may lead 
to slavery or deprivation of life and liberty of others.        
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
55
Article 5  (Prohibition of Torture):
No one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or 
punishment.
any act by which severe pain or suffering, whether 
physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a person for such purposes as obtaining from him 
or a third person information or a confession, punishing him for an act he or a third person has 
committed or is suspected of  having committed, or intimidating or coercing him or a third person, 
or for any reason based on discrimination of  any kind, when such pain or suffering is inflicted by 
or at the instigation of  or with the consent or acquiescence of  a public official or other person 
acting in an official capacity. It does not include pain or suffering arising only from, inherent in or 
incidental to lawful sanctions.
According to the UN Convention on torture and other inhuman criminal 
degrading treatment 1984, torture means, 
Torture is another important aspect in the violation of one's human rights. This 
may be inflicted in various ways and means. In this, the punishment is employed by 
various methods. The methods may be physical, psychological, mental, etc. They are 
employed either to get information from a person, or to harass a person as revenge by a 
powerful person against a weak person. At times, even for sadistic pleasure or for no 
reason also it is employed. Many a times this is employed by Law enforcing agencie's 
against the criminals or an accused to get information in the investigation of a crime. 
Many a times men employee torture against women. 
Torture is prohibited by international law of human rights. The United Nations 
on December 10,1984, adopted a Convention against Torture and other Cruel, 
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment banning its practice in any form. 
The Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action 1993, otherwise referred to as the 
World Congress of Human Rights condemned torture in unequivocal terms. 
Cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment constitutes as a form of torture. This 
includes to cover a particular situation depending on the type of punishment that is 
inflicted. For example : Corporal punishment, interment in dark cells, restraining the 
movement of a person by keeping him in chains, employing any method to create fear 
in the person within visible form of methods, use of drugs on prisoners, castration or 
practices, genital mutilation, depriving the basic necessities, especially depriving food 
and water, solitary confinement, or any other form of methods that are employed 
against a individual or group of persons, constitutes as torture.
56
To prevent torture, cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment, the UN constituted a 
committee of ten experts elected by the member states. The committee monitors the 
implementation of the Convention and makes recommendations to be followed by the 
states. The summary of observations and recommendations are regularly submitted to 
the General Assembly. To prevent any kind of prohibitary activities, and blatant acts of 
the states towards their citizens, in recent times, international agencies like the World 
Bank and International Monetary Fund incorporated practices of torture as one of the 
grounds to refuse loans to countries. India, enacted legislations to prevent torture  and 
consider it as a criminal offence under sections 498 A of IPC.
This means, any person irrespective of their economic, 
political, social or cultural status has human rights that are 
recognized universally. Accordingly, a citizen belongs to 
every country needs to be treated on equal basis at least for 
the enjoyment of basic minimum rights. A non-citizen of a 
country also has certain fundamental rights during their 
stay in another country and no deprivation is permissible. 
For example., X a citizen of India travels to England on any 
purpose, during his travel across various countries, X has to be treated with utmost 
respect and dignity to his personality, and be permitted to enjoy life and liberty, 
according to the law of the land. Refugees, migrant workers, and non-citizens of a 
country or physically, mentally infirmed people (disabled) have to be protected. The 
responsibility lies on the individuals and the society also. No deprivation of life and 
liberty is permissible under any circumstances. The Charter of the United Nations 
clearly states that we the people of the United Nations, which means, people of the 
world as natural persons are same and equal in all respects in the eye of law . The 
UNESCO and other organs of the UN in regular intervals train the personnel of 
various states and suggest the ways and means to prevent any kind of violation. 
In order to achieve equality before law , a state is entitled to extend any concession 
to any group of people depending on various factors. At the same time, people who are 
under a protective umbrella of state also need to remember that their protection or 
concessions may be withdrawn by the state at any time, if in its opinion the purposes 
for which the concessions extended to any group of people are achieved. Accordingly, 
Article 6 (Right to recognition as person before the law): 
Everyone has the right to recognition everywhere as a person before the law.
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
57
to bridge the gap between developed and developing states, a number of concessions 
are granted in various areas in their relations with each other. 
However, a number of derogatory practices are reported regularly, around the 
world. Any derogatory practice that take's place against any individisal or group of 
persons in any country is  highly condemnable. The sum and substance of the Article is 
to inform the individuals that every one of us have to exercise their rights with 
responsibility to promote and respect the equality, dignity, life and liberty of every 
individual. 
This Article is an extension of Articles 2 and 6. According to this Article, under 
no circumstances, whatever may be the status of a person, all are equal in the eye of 
law . At times, in order to promote the rights of certain weaker sections or vulnerable 
groups like women, children, disabled, minorities or people belonging to various 
social backward sections privileges are extended for their development as a basis for 
their protection development by the law of the land of a country, cannot be considered 
as unequal.
This Article corresponds to article 14 of the Indian Constitution, which has 
inculcated the principle of Equality. However, due to lack of proper understanding of 
the spirit of common brotherhood of the world, or relegating their ethical and moral 
duties temporarily people across the world practice a number of derogatory practices 
against each other, to protect their own interests at the cost of the life and liberty of 
others. This type of illegal motives many a time leads to unnecessary frictions among 
individuals and result in as obstacles for development.
The indirect caution of the Article is that no one is to be treated unequal in the 
eye of law . This is the duty of the states to implement the spirit of international law and 
the Charter of the United Nations, which they themselves adopted and promised to 
fulfill. Along with the States, we the people of the United Nations too have the 
responsibility to achieve the common brotherhood, spirit of international law and 
human rights in true spirit, as partners of a state.
Article 7  (Equality before the law) :
All are equal before the law and are entitled without any discrimination to equal 
protection of  the law. All are entitled to equal promotion against any discrimination in 
violation of  this Declaration and against any incitement to such discrimination.
58
Article 8  (Right to an effective remedy) :
Every one has the right to an effective remedy by the competent national tribunals for 
acts violating the fundamental rights guaranteed to him by the constitution or law.
The International Criminal Court, The Hague,The Netherlands.
Article 9 (Prohibition of Arbitrary Arrest) :
No one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention, or exile.
 This Article has to be read, in conjunction with the previous two Articles.A very 
important word of these articles is "every one" Accordingly no distinction be made by 
a state between citizens, foreigners, or stateless persons in the enforcement of their 
rights as a person before law . The aim of this article is to provide a remedy for any 
person through domestic courts in case of violation of their constitutional or legal 
rights. In such cases a remedy may be claimed only under domestic law of that country 
but not under the Universal Declaration. 
In a similar fashion, if any crime committed by any body which constitutes as a 
crime under International law , International tribunals need to dealwith such criminals. 
However, since there was no such mechanism available to try the crimes of 
International crimanals (such as former rulers, Internation crimanals, or terrorists), 
states used to constitatute adhoc tribunals to try their offences many a times, these 
tribunals used to be partial in their approach. In order to prevent such abuses, the UN 
establiseed the International Criminal Court in 2002 at The Hague, The Netherlands. 
A number of states including India and USA etc. are not parties to this court's 
Jurisdiction. Further, in 2005 in the General Assembly adopted a declaration with a set 
of principles and guidelines to be followed by states to protect the human rights of 
International Criminals too. 
Though a good number of states are yet to become parties to the Rome Statute, it 
is expected that with the help of the States, the steps taken by UN, the victims will now 
find a place of justice in upholding their rights. 
 This is the first Article followed by the subsequent two 
articles in the declaration, guaranteeing the life and liberty of an 
individual from the criminal law excesses that are often 
committed by the executive authorities of a country. According 
to the provision of the article, no person can be arrested on 
suspicion, or to keep him in jail, or to export a person to an 
undisclosed destination, without the knowledge of judiciary. 
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
59
This is the general rule of international law and need to be obeyed by the states parties 
without any deviation. 
This Article guarantee an individual's freedom from an arbitrary arrest, 
detentaon or transport  to an undisclosed destination by law enforcing agencies on a 
mere suspicion in exercies of their  criminal law powers.
Preventive detention means, taking a person into police custody to prevent him 
from doing a crime. Many a times, even to prevent the exercise of democratic rights, 
police take people into custody on the name of law and order. Preventive detention 
legally means detention of a person without trial and conviction by a court, but on the 
suspicion in the mind of the executive of any act of crime. for example. during the 
freedom struggle, the British government used to arrest people on flimsy grounds and 
detain them for years together withou a trial; sometimes even used to send them to 
undisclosed destination as exile. 
Preventive detention is a common feature in many democracies including the 
USA, Britain, and Canada. However, in these countries it is exercised only during war 
time but not in peace time. In India, the Constitution of India has envisaged such a 
situation for reasons of security, maintenance of peace and good order and or to 
maintain supplies and services essential to the community.  In India, the Legislature is 
empowered to enact a legislation on preventive detention authorizing the executive to 
take necessary steps.  However, many a times, the abuse of power by law enforcing 
agencies constitutes as a violation of human rights.  The abuse of power by law 
enforcing agencies lead to a boiling point, where in a number of undertrial accused 
persons are languishing in Jails for years together without a judicial remedy.  Taking 
this situration into consideration, the Supreme Court of India laid down number of 
guidelines from time to time to be followed by the law enforcing authorities to prevent 
Arbitrary Arrest Detention Exile (Jail in Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands)
60
the abuse of human righs of innocent people. (D.K. Basu V . State of West Bengal, AIR 1997 SC610., 
Subesing V . State Haryana, AIR 2006SC 117, Ramlila Maidan, V . Home Secretary, MANU/SC/0131,2012, 3rd 
Report of National Police Commision.)
This Article impose an obligation on the states, and the civil societies 
across the world to prevent any type of misuse of powers especially in 
detention. Detention literally and physically leads to violation of  a 
number of human rights such as right to freedom of movement, 
speech, life and liberty etc.  Guantanamo Bay shown in the picture 
was converted as a Jail in 2002 by the US Government to exile and 
punish the war prisoners of Afghanistan and Iraq. The treatment 
meted out by the prisoners was deplorable from the prespective of 
human rights.  The situation was comparable to that of the practice adopted by the 
British Government to many Indians in the Kalapani Jail in Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands during the freedom struggle.
According to this Article in any type of disputes (both civil and 
criminal), a person has every right to defend his case through a court 
of law or any other legal means that has been prevailed in a country. 
The misuse of the procedures established by many states, especially in 
the developed countries with respect to war crimes, as discussed above 
in Article 9, the UN has taken the final call for the establishment of 
International Criminal Court. 
In India, due to lack of awareness among the various sections of 
society about the legal nuances and the adequate knowledge of constitution, the law 
enforcing authorities interfere in civil dispute and try to settle them acting as 
mediators. Many a times, this constitutes as violation of human rights. For example, 
especially in the villages across the country, the rich and powerful people often with the 
help of law enforcing authorities try to settle their disputes in their favour preventing 
the poor people from seeking judicial help. To prevent such situations, the Judiciary in 
a number of dicisions condemned the procedures adopted by the law enforcing 
authorities, and the practices adopted by the prosecution in the examination of a 
witness in a case. Sadananda Bai, V . C.N. Ravi and ors W .P .(e) No 17400 of 2008, j 
Article 10  (Right to a Fair Trial) :
Everyone is entitled in full equality to a fair and public hearing by an independent and 
impartial tribunal, in the determination of  his rights and obligations and of  any criminal 
charge against him
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
61
lakshamma and Anr V . Lakhmi @ land Aru v commisner of police and ors 
MANU/AP/1189/2004. 
Accordingly, the Judiciary in a number of dicisions from time to time 
emphasized that the provisions of the article be read with the constitutional dictums. It 
held that both in Criminal and Civil cases, the cases have to be heard by competent 
judicial authority and dispose of the cases at the earliest possible time.  Considering 
the amount of delay in criminal cases, it ordered the lower courts to dispose of the 
cases in an expeditious manner in order to augment the fundamental human rights of 
the individuals. 
The picture depicts the court scene of the International 
Tribunal constituted by the victorious powers in 1945 
(Allied powers USA, UK and others) of the second world 
war to punish (Axis powers, defeated powers in the war 
especially that of Germany and Japan) the architects of 
war including Adolf Hitler for their crimes in violating peace and security of mankind. 
This was the first trial in the history of International law , wherein it was held that 
individuals may be punishable under international law , for the crimes committed 
against humanity. With this judgment, individuals became a subject and object of 
international law , though states being the main subjects of international law . The 
tribunal's establishment proved the point beyond doubt that any guilty person, 
occupying any high position to be punished legally by a competent court.
The Tokyo Tribunal was constituted in 1946 to try the war crimes of several 
people belonging to Japan for their alleged crimes during the War period. The 
dissenting opinion of the great Indian Jurist Radhabinod Pal  has had a great impact 
Article 11 (Presumption of Innocence and no retroactive application of 
Penal Laws) :
1. Everyone charged with a penal offence has the right to be presumed innocent until 
proved guilty according to law in a public trial at which he has all the guarantees 
necessary for his defence.
2. No one shall be held guilty of  any penal offence because of  any act or omission of  any 
act, which did not constitute a penal offence, under national, or international law, at 
the time when it was committed. No heavy penalty is to 
impose, than the one that was applicable at the time the penal 
offence was committed.
Nuremberg Trial After
Second World War  
62
on the development of human rights in the modern 
world, especially on the development of  
International humanitarian law (otherwise known 
as the International law of war to be practiced 
during the period of war and after the war with 
respect to the treatment of war criminals by the 
victorious powers). The constitution of these two 
fribunals led for the establisment of a number 
adhoc courts in modern times especially in Rwauda, Yugoslavia etc. Taking into 
consideration of constitution of such adnoc tribuanals and the deplorable practices 
adoptted by them, led the UN to establish a permanent International Criminal Court 
to stop constitution of such tribunals by the nation-states. These developments have a 
great impact on the development of international law of crimes or international 
criminal law . 
The Article mainly advances four important principles. They are:
 This principle advocates that every person 
arrested on whatsoever reason of suspicion or charged with any criminal offence 
including the gravest offence of murder, shall not be treated as guilty of the 
charged offence until and unless established and proved by a court of law .  This is 
the reason why, in many countries there exist a provision to release a person on 
some legal conditions (popularly known as bail) from the custody  in order to 
enable the person to exercise his or ther human rights or personal liberties 
pending  trial.
The word guarantee in the Article  means, that any 
person charged with any offence has freedom to defend the case until the crime is  
proved and finalized by the highest court of a country. This is the reason why 
appeals are made from lower court to Supreme Court of a country to exhaust all 
available legal remedies. In case, if the person charged is a poor person and 
unable to defend the case personally, it is the duty of state to provide legal 
representation to the fullest extent to defend the case of such individual to 
guarantee the human rights or fundamental rights as per the provisions of the 
constitution  of a country.
 There is another important principle that no 
person charged with a criminal offence is punishable without a proper trial by a 
competent court of law . The principle has been developed on the legal adage 
(a) The presumption of innocence:
(b) The right to a defence:  
(c) The right to a public hearing:
The Famous Tokyo Tribunal
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
63
“justice should not only be done but should be seen to be done.”  If any inquiry 
or trial is conducted in secret, there may be a possibility to upset the apple cart of 
justice. This may lead to violation of human rights of the accused without giving 
a chance to the person, to prove his innocence or without being examined or 
corroboration of evidence.
 This is another important principle to uphold the 
promotion and protection of human rights. According to this principle, in no 
circumstances a person shall be punished except by the law in force at the time of 
commission of the crime. If any new law is, introduced increasing the quantum 
of punishment after the period of trial shall not be applicable to the person 
charged and punished for the proven crime.
  Though not stated in the Article explicitly, it serves as an 
automatic principle of human rights. This principle legally protects a person not 
to be tried or punisned twice for the same offence. This is a constitutional 
guarantee to every individual. This being a procedural part and guaranteed by 
every nation through constitution or by the provisions of a legislative enactment. 
It need to  be adhered strictly without any deviance, by all the countries.
The word privacy derived from the Latin word “privatus” which means 
separated from others.  In other words, a person has the full freedom to live the way he 
or she likes to live and without the interference of any body. Its origin is linked to the 
theory of Natural law of rights, wherein the Individual is free to live the way he likes to 
be. However, it should not affect on the rights of others.  Basing on the common law 
principle, the individual has full protection in person and property. Samuel D. Warren 
(a Barrister), and Louis.d. Brandeis (former Judge of the Supreme Court of America) 
in their Article in the Harvard Law Review , in 1890, introduced for the first time, the 
legal concept of privacy in the American context. This Article is today considered as 
the maiden piece in the development of law of privacy. Basing on this research work  
number of changes have taken place in the legal system of America,which led for the 
fourth amendment of the constitution recognising privacy as a fundamental right.
      Alan Westin in his book Privacy and Freedom (1968) defines the right to privacy   
(d) Non-retroactivity of Law:
(e) Double Jeopardy:
Article 12 (Right to Privacy) :
No one shall be subjected to arbitrary interference with his privacy, family, home, or 
correspondence, or to attacks upon his honour and reputation. Everyone has the right to the 
protection of  the law against such interference or attacks.
64
as “Each individual is continually engaged in a personal adjustment process in which 
he balances, the desire for privacy with the desire for disclosure, and communication 
for himself to others in light of the environmental conditions and social norms set by 
the society in which he lives”.
In the contemporary era of rapid expansion of science and technology (part of 
cultural rights ) privacy became an important aspect . Today privacy covers a number 
of areas including home, family honour and reputation. The implementation and 
protection of this right is very important from a legal angle. In the Indian context, the 
Constitution of India has not explicitly defined the right. However extending the 
provisions of Article 21 of the Constitution, the Supreme Court of India enlisted it as a 
part and parcel of right to life and liberty. In view of the intrusion of various players 
through information technology into the data or tapping telephone conversations, 
wire tapping etc., to match with many advanced countries, the Government of India is 
also contemplating to bring in a new legislation guaranteeing right to privacy.
According to this Article, every individual whose information is sought by 
anybody without the legal permission of a person, it violates the right to life, liberty, 
and freedom of dignity. Accordingly, the Right to Information Act section 8 
recognized privacy as an important aspect, which prevents information of personal 
nature of a person. 
The provisions of this Article ( para 3 and 4) were further expanded by International 
Covenant on Civil and Political rights under Article 12.
According to the provisions of the Article, every individual has a right to move 
freely across the borders of a country and to settle down wherever he likes. No one can 
Article 13 (Freedom of Movement, exit, and Re-entry) :
1. Everyone has the right to freedom of  movement and residence with the borders of  each 
state.
2. Everyone has the right to leave any country including his own and to return to his 
country.
3. The above-mentioned rights shall not be subject to any restrictions except those which 
are provided by law which are necessary to protect national security, public order, 
public health or morals or the rights and freedoms of  others and are consistent with the 
other rights recognized.
4. No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of  the right to enter his own country.
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
65
object the movement of a person on any ground whatsoever, especially on the basis of 
sex, religion, language, etc.  This right confers on the individual to move from one 
country to another country freely subject to the provisions of law of that country and 
international law .  It means, even if a person leaves a country temporarily, one has the 
right to return as long the person has not given up or relinquished his nationality. 
The Article clearly specifies that it is not an absolute 
right. It is subject to regulation by law .  In the case of emergency 
or internal strife or for any reason a state may prohibit  the entry 
of people to a particular place. This certainly constitutes a 
deprivation of the right. However, due to circumstances beyond 
the control on grounds of security, and to protect the interests of 
people of the region, a state may resort to such steps. 
Asylum is an ancient juridical notion, which has been 
developed to expel a subject or group of subjects for their 
alleged violations of law of the land. According to the 
general principles of  international law , any non-national 
of a country enters into another country either legally or 
illegally to seek shelter temporarily for any reason 
whatsoever it may be (the reasons may arise out of  
political, social, economical, or cultural or legal issues.) that arose in his own country, 
such shelter is referred to as asylum. It is the right of a state to grant permission to stay 
in its country or not. In the ancient and medieval periods this power was used by states 
in an indiscriminate manner. However, in the contemporary era, asylum is subject to 
regulation of a number of treaties, wherein the states are under an obligation to extend 
asylum to a person who seeks refugee in its territory. However, it cannot be demanded 
as a matter of right states being soverigns, even after exhaustive legal regulations and 
the covenants on human rights, asylum is  a most controversial subject, and the states 
still use it as their absolute discretionary power. To provide the benefits of this right, to 
Article 14 (Right to Asylum) :
1. Everyone has the right seek and to enjoy in other countries asylum from persecution.
2. This right may not be invoked in the case of  prosecutions genuinely arising from non-
political crimes or from acts contrary to the purposes and principles of  the United 
Nations. 
66
exercise freely, the UN is taking all possible steps to adopt a convention to regulate 
discretionary power of states. Accordingly even tody it is nothing but the discretionary 
power of a state to accord asylum.
Clause 2 of the Article provides the power to a state not to grant or refuse asylum 
to persons who are criminals in a country, or persons who commit international 
crimes or violators of   international human rights or commit breach of peace and 
security .
It is the aim of international law to establish the 
one world concept, wherein there will be only 
one state and the laws are universally applicable 
without any territorial boundaries, wherein we 
the people of the UN have one single nationality 
that is as a member of mankind. It being an 
utopian concept to establish one world and to 
whither away the idea of a state, nationality still 
plays an important role Nationality provides an identity and all kinds of legal 
protection to an individual at all 
times, whether residing in his own 
country or abroad. Here one has to 
note that citizenship used in some 
countries as a synonym to nationality. 
Strictly speaking, citizenship is not a 
synonym to nationality.  
According to the general principles of international law , all persons are eligible to 
have a nationality or citizenship of a country in the world. This alone enables people to 
enjoy the guaranteed human rights. However, millions of people across the world are 
without nationality of any country (otherwise referred to as stateless persons in 
international law). Statelessness means a person not having any legal bond or 
protection of a state. Such people are exposed to a number of difficulties including the 
Article 15 (Right to Nationality) :
1. Everyone has the right to a nationality.
2. No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of  his nationality nor denied the right to 
change his nationality.
Life of  Stateless persons
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
67
denial of basic human rights of life, liberty, and equality. Many a times they are subject 
to target of various crimes by the state agencies, wherein they live as refugees. They 
may not get even basic necessary services like social security, education, health care 
etc. It is difficult to imagine such a kind of life. To prevent the situation the constant 
efforts of the UN resulted in adopting a convention in 1954 - Convention relating to 
the status of stateless persons. As of now , only around 65 states became parties to the 
convention. This convention guarantees the basic rights to stateless persons, and 
imposes obligations on the states parties to discharge their duties towards the 
protection and promotion of their human rights.
In 1963 taking into consideration of reducing the increasing number of stateless 
persons (refugees) it has adopted a Convention on the Reduction of Stateless Persons 
for which only 37 states are parties. Apart from this, the UN has a Convention on 
Refugees adopted in 1951. It has established an organ named as UN High 
Commissioner for Refugees. The UNHCR mostly looks after the issues of stateless 
persons and their needs. According to the available estimates, around 12-13 thousand 
million stateless persons are residing across the world.     
Apart from above treaties, all the treaties, conventions and covenants on human 
rights dealing with general and specific rights (such as the Children rights Convention 
etc) all have reiterated their commitment  to end statelessness. 
This article prohibits all discriminatory and customary practices, which are 
illegal in the eye of law with respect to the institution of marriage. Though there exist a 
number of differences in the structure, patterns of family in the world, the main aim of 
the article is to protect the basic rights of individuals about their choice, and freedom to 
marry whomsoever they want, and the non-interference in the marital issues.  Since 
the free and full consent raises a number of issues, the UN adopted a Convention on 
Article 16 (Right to Marry and Family Life) :
1.  Men and women of  full age without any limitation due to race, nationality or religion 
have the right to marry and to found a family. They are entitled to equal right as to 
marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution.
2. Marriage shall be entered into only with the free and full consent of  the intending 
spouses.
3. The family is the natural and fundamental group unit of  society and is entitled to 
protection by society and the state.
68
the Consent to Marriage, Minimum Age for Marriage and Registration of Marriage 
adopted in 1962. According to provisions of the Convention,  all types of marriages 
including inter caste, inter religious are permissible, once if the spouses agree to each 
other with full consent and knowing the consequences of such marriage depending on 
the societal conditions wherein they live. 
According to the provisions of the article and the convention, same sex 
marriages, or live-in relationships are also permissible as a part of human right to life, 
liberty and equality. In some countries, the above types of marriages are well 
recognized. Judicial decisions in many countries, including India upheld such 
marriages as extending the protection of individual's freedom, liberty and privacy.
From ancient to modern times, one of the important aspects of man's life is 
property. In the long drawn battle for the freedom of individual across the world, 
property also constituted as a central issue. Accordingly, right to property ha been 
recognised as an important right by the Declatation to lead a life with liberty and 
dignity in a free and fair manner. To guarantee the other freedoms especially right to 
life and liberty, right to property constitutes as one of the basic right.
In India, right to property was guaranteed as a fundamental right. However, 
th
through the 44  amendment to the constitution in 1978, right to property converted as 
a constitutional right from that of a fundamental right. By this change, it became 
feasible for the Government to acquire any private property for public purpose by 
paying lesser compensation than the market price to the landowners. The Supreme 
Court in Radhye Shyam V Greater Nodia Corporation in July 2011, held that no 
person could be deprived of his property, except by authority of law , and any law 
invoked for personal purposes, which are beyond doubt that land acquired is not for 
public purposes; such illegal motives of a state cannot take away a legal right. This 
ensures that even as a constitutional right, it safeguards the property of a person as a 
fundamental right.   
Article 17 (Right to Property) :
1. Everyone has the right to own property alone as well as in association with others
2. No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of  his property.
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
69
Article 18 (Freedom of thought, conscience and religion) :
Everyone has the right to freedom of  thought conscience and religion; this right 
includes freedom to change his religion or belief  and freedom, either alone or in community 
with others and in public or private to manifest his religion or belief  in teaching, practice, 
worship, and observance.
Freedom of thought, conscience, religion, or 
belief are the most essential fundamental freedoms 
after life, liberty, and equality. They cannot be 
suspended even in a state of emergency. Everyone 
has right to practice his own religion and observe 
the principles with faith, and belief without any 
interference of anybody including the state.  This 
implies, people are free to wear the clothes that are required by the religion to perform 
certain ceremonies or distinctive dress code that is prescribed by the religion. However, 
the advent of terrorist strikes led some countries (France started interfering with the 
freedom of Muslim women wearing a Burkha) and imposing fine. These acts of states 
constitute as violations to the freedom of the individuals in observing their religious or 
cultural faith.
The General Assembly in November 1981, adopted a resolution requesting 
states to restrain from all forms of intolerance and discrimination against religious 
faith and belief. In continuation of the resolution, the UN Human Rights Commission 
(now Human Rights Council) adopted a good number of resolutions and framed a 
number of  principles to monitor the situation.
The Human Rights Council in 2010 adopted another resolution condemning all 
derogatory practices by states parties towards the religious freedom and belief and 
practices of individuals. It also reiterated the significance for the promotion of 
freedom of thought conscience and religion without any discrimination. However, to 
crystallize the provisions of the declaration and other legal documents, people learn to 
live with harmony and allow everyone to practice their faith. That alone would yield 
results and make it possible to realise the right in its fullest extent.   
70
Article 19 (Freedom of Opinion and Expression) :
Everyone has the right to freedom of  opinion and expression; this right includes 
freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information 
and ideas through any media and regardless of  frontiers.
Article 20 (Freedom of Assembly and Association) :
1. Everyone has the right to freedom of  peaceful assembly and association.
2. No one may be compelled to belong to an association.
This is an important pillar of democracy. 
According to the provisions, media needs to 
be free from the clutches of the state to 
impart information and to express ideas of 
people freely. This alone could help to 
realise the aims of good governance of a 
democracy. This right guarantees free speech and bans fear of expression. However, 
any excess use of the freedom is not permissible. This includes write, speech and air the 
views of a person through any mode of communication that is feasible. Basing on this 
freedom only the right to information has been born. These freedoms though advocate 
liberty of an individual to express freely, at the same time impose a responsibility on 
every one of us to exercise the rights with due caution. At the sametime, necessary 
restrictions may be imposed by state through legal regulation in order to protect the 
life, liberty , decency and other freedoms of all the individuals. 
The previous article, and this one are having an inter link 
with each other.  Freedom of association is one of the 
most important right to express their opinion either 
individually or collectively. The International Labour 
organization has adopted a number of conventions and 
resolutions guaranteeing the freedom of workers to form an association to express 
their legitimate demands and to secure justice from the inimical activities of their 
employers. Many marches including freedom marche play a vital role in keeping 
pressure on a government to discharge its constitutional obligations. On the other 
hand, a government many a times employ methods to restrict such movements. These 
may be justified at times but not always. 
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
71
Article 21 (Participation in Government) :
1. Everyone has the right to take part in the Government of  his country directly or  
through freely chosen representatives.
2. Everyone has the right of  equal access to public service in his country
The will of the people shall be basis of the authority of Government. This will 
shall be expressed in periodic and genuine elections which shall be by universal and 
equal suffrage and be held by secret vote or by equivalent free voting procedures.
This article reiterates the 
principle of  Abraham 
Lincoln, the for mer 
President of US who stated 
Government of the people, 
for the people, by the 
people. In a democracy, 
there is no place for anybody to claim that some are superiors by occupying the 
ministerial posts. All the officers, ministers and the head of a state have to bear in mind 
at all times, that they are only representing the people who have elected them to govern 
for a particular period.  It is the democracy alone which could win the hearts of the 
people and only through democracy, one can be able to render their best for the 
progressive augmentation of human rights.      
 To sustain the spirit of democracy, it is the duty of the state to conduct elections 
from grass root level (panchayats in a village) to Parliament at regular periodic 
intervals. No deviation is permissible in any manner, which may lead to dictatorship. 
The recent agitations in Middle East are the example wherein people may not allow 
any government to overpower their rights with an iron hand. It is the duty of every 
individual to take part in the governance in whatever manner; they could contribute, 
according to the capabilities of each individual. It indirectly brings in the duty that 
since the state and its property belongs to the people, all the people in every country 
have a duty not to resort to violence or destroy the property of the state. The peaceful 
raise of voice alone can bring in change. This article indirectly advocates "ahimsa" 
principle of Mahatama Gandhi to be followed at all times to establish peace and 
security on the globe and to realise the human rights in a democratic manner.
72
Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights
Article 22 (Economic, Social and cultural Rights):
Everyone as a member of  society has the right to social security and is entitled to 
realization through national effort and international cooperation and in accordance with 
the organization and resources of  each state of  the economic social and cultural rights 
indispensable for his dignity and the freedom of  his personality. 
 To exercise the claim rights (civil and political rights), and to enjoy the other 
basic rights of life, liberty, and equality, these constitute as the most vital rights. They 
are directives to the state to fulfill the wishes of the people and provide the methods 
and means for the sustainability of mankind. However, in many countries including 
India, judiciary started interpreting them as part and parcel of claim rights. The Indian 
Supreme Court in no uncertain terms expressed that if the non-justiciable (Economic, 
Social and cultural rights) rights have a bearing on the exercise of the justiciable rights 
(civil and Political rights) they assume the character of claim rights, and it thus 
constitutes as a duty of the state to extend protection.  But, these being only directives 
or non-justiciable in their sphere, their character cannot be changed.  If at any time the 
judiciary or any other organ (mostly international organs) directs them to implement, 
states many a times come up with the plea of economic, social and cultural aspects 
may hamper their implementation. All of us need these rights, and it is the duty of 
everyone both at the international and national level to strive for the achievement of 
these rights. The success of implementation and the enjoyment of these rights alone 
guarantee the freedoms of the individuals and could lead us to establish a conflict free 
world.  
From this article till Article 27 deals with the economic, social and cultural 
rights. These articles aim to realize the necessities of mankind. These articles are the 
basic articles for the full development of mankind and the realization of human rights. 
Though these articles are placed as second part in the declaration, later it was realized 
by the UN that without the basic needs man might not be able to exercise his civil and 
political rights fully. Accordingly, at the time of implementation of covenants, the 
Economic, Social, Cultural Rights covenant became the first and the Covenant on 
Civil and Political Rights became the second.    
While the UN considering the independence obtained by many states in the 
fifties and sixties the plight of their people and the economic scenario in which most of 
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
73
them were placed, to guarantee the rights of economic, social and cultural nature, it 
took steps at quick succession and adopted the International Covenant on Economic, 
Social and Cultural rights as the basic one in 1966. These few articles were expanded in 
the Covenant in detail, which have had a great impact on every branch of knowledge, 
and later on a number of agreements, treaties including the agreements of trade. 
According to this article, it is the priority of the nation states at the individual 
level and at the international level to strive for the promotion of the basic needs of the 
individuals at all times. The resources of the world need to be shared by everybody 
equally without any vested interest. No state or group of states (particularly the 
developed states) could claim unilaterally sovereignty over the resources. Accordingly, 
to achieve the spirit of the convention, the Outer Space, the High Seas, the Antarctic, 
and other zones have been declared as no man's land. In these areas, no state can 
explore and exploit the resources without a license from the UN. During the licensing 
period, states or their representative has to explore the resources, and pay the amount 
of resources fixed at the award of the contract to the UN. The UN will in turn 
distribute the resources to the poorer states to develop economically.
The spirit of this article led for the evolution of reservations or concessions at the 
international level long back by the developed states to developing states in their 
numerous relations. These concessions include in trade, sharing of resources, science 
and technology, and every possible other area to make them self sufficient to 
participate in an equal manner. The same philosophy has been carried out by many 
states at the national level to people those who are in need of the support of the state. 
These rights are part of several constitutions including India. These are referred to as 
Directive Principles of State Policy in India.
This article further asserts that it is the duty of national governments to provide 
minimum social security to every individual particularly, with respect to basic 
requirements like education, health, and minimum maintenance allowance etc. The 
article one side advocates self development, determination and on the other hand, 
imposes a responsibility on every stake holder to maintain balance between 
development, growth, and sustainability of resources for the future generations. 
74
Article 23 (Right to Work) :
1. Everyone has the right to work, to free choice of  employment, to just and favourable 
conditions of  work and to protection against unemployment.  
2. Everyone, without any discrimination has the right to equal pay for equal work.
3. Everyone who works has the right to just and favourable remuneration ensuring for 
himself  and his family an existence worth of  human dignity, and supplemented, if  
necessary, by other means of  social protection.
4. Everyone has the right to form and to join trade unions for the protection his interests.  
This article is another important one among the various 
economic, social, and cultural rights. The other rights in this 
category, such as right to food, right to life, right to health, 
right to social security are positive rights, whereas right to 
work has both positive and negative elements. The negative 
aspect of it imposes a responsibility on every one, to earn 
their livelihood only by moral and legal means. Any type  of 
work chosen by a person needs the approval of the society, 
and the law of the land. Further, it imposes another 
restriction on individual to be involved in the process of 
development of society by contributing their share of knowledge to the state for its 
economic progress. There is no place for anybody to expect their livelihood without 
engaging themselves in some sort of work according to their capacity. At the same 
time, it imposes a responsibility indirectly on everyone to take care of children and 
older people through their earning capacity. Furthermore, in order to claim human 
dignity it prohibits such works, which are inhumane in nature like manual scavenging 
etc as works to be undertaken.  
In the positive side, it advocates that work is a basic human right. This implies 
that everyone has to participate in the production and other activities of income 
generation of the society and state.  By such participation, it automatically brings in an 
obligation on everyone to respect the other person, whatever, the work that they like to 
engage in. It is the duty of all employers to pay the remuneration which is equivalent to 
their daily living as per the law of each country. 
In order to promote this right and to form as association as discussed above (Arts. 
18-20) play a crucial role. The UN through the International Labour organization 
monitors various aspects relating to the rights and obligations of the employers and 
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
75
employees. The ILO has a unique structure among all the organs of the UN. It has a 
tripartite structure, wherein the States, employers and the workers together participate 
in the decision making process.   In order to improve the economic and social quality 
of work, and social security apart from all other organs, the Economic and Social 
Council regularly monitors the work and frames the policy formulations to be adopted 
by the states. 
This article further, guarantees the right to work of migrant workers either within 
the territorial frontiers of a country or people who flee from one country to another 
country due to physical, economic, social, or political reasons. In order to protect the 
rights of migrant workers, the UN in 1990 adopted a Convention on the Protection of 
the Rights of all Migrant Workers and Members of their Families, which came into 
force in 2003. The Committee of Migrant Workers coordinates with the member 
countries and the UN bodies to ensure their rights. However, it is to be noted that many 
of the labour welfare conventions including the above one are not ratified by many 
states including India. 
This article ensures the policies adopted by the International Labour 
Organisation that every employee and worker has to have limited number of work 
hours. According to the regulations of the ILO, no person is employed more than 8 
hours work per day. However, it differs from the categories of people up to a maximum 
of 12 hours per day. In the case of women and children, they cannot be employed in 
certain avocations, which are dangerous to their health. Children below the age of 14 
years cannot be employed. They have to have not more than 6 hours of work for a day.  
Women and children cannot be employed after 7 p.m. in the evening.   All the workers 
need to have weekly holidays and other holidays as per the law of each country or 
region. These provisions will be applicable to all types of employees especially strictly 
be implemented in the case of regular employees' who are on pay roll of an 
employment. All workers are eligible for compensation of work, in case of accident or 
death, and for pension and other benefits after retirement. 
Article 24 (Right to Rest and Leisure) :
Everyone has the right to rest and leisure including reasonable limitation of  working 
hours and periodic holidays with pay.
76
Article 25 (Right to an adequate standard of living and health) :
1. Everyone  has the right to a standard of  living adequate for the health and well-being 
of  himself  and of  his family, including food, clothing housing and medical care and 
necessary social  services, and the right to security in the event of  unemployment, 
sickness, disability widowhood, old age or other lack of  livelihood in circumstances 
beyond his control.
2. Motherhood and childhood are entitled to special care and assistance. All children, 
whether born in or out of  wedlock, shall enjoy the same social protection. 
This article highlights the significance of 
basic minimum needs that every individual 
requires to lead a life to satisfy the 
necessities such as food, clothing, 
household requirements, and common 
minimum standards of   water, light, 
sanitation, pollution free environment, 
health, and education. This article again 
reiterates that everyone be provided with work, and to enjoy the freedoms. This article 
has a link with many other provisions of the International Covenant on Economic 
Social and Cultural Rights and International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. It 
reiterates that it is the duty of the society and the state to provide the necessary means 
of livelihood. The state has an onerous responsibility to encourage the development of 
science and technology, which are highly essential tools for the progressive 
development. In this regard, to help the states to achieve the minimum standards of 
living to provide for people at the national level, the UN adopted a number of 
international instruments. These instruments in turn, guaranteed the right to free 
exploitation of resources, and right to self determination. In fact, this right has further 
augmented the right to development as another important component. 
This article imposes an obligation on the states to achieve adequate levels of 
nutrition, to eliminate hunger, and malnutrition. The various organs of the UN and 
the other bodies including International Monetary Fund and World Bank have an 
obligation to extend sufficient loans to developing states at minimal interest rates. 
Among all the organs of the UN, United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
and the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) regularly engage a number of 
researchers to evolve strategies to meet the required basic needs. 
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
77
The UNDP has launched a programme called Habitat. Accordingly, the 
programmes implemented by the states are reviewed periodically. Basing on the 
review , remedial mechanism is evolved to rectify the defects, if any are there, to 
achieve the eight important goals of the Millennium. Under the programme, UNDP 
involves a number of players (which include, states, individuals and NGO's) as 
partners to implement its ideals. These 
programmes are monitored by the 
nation-states through the Annual 
sessions of the General Assembly, and 
frames the agenda every year to achieve 
the targets.  
It further highlights the significance of right to health including the prevention of 
communicable diseases like HIV/AIDS and other common diseases. The clarion call 
of this article imposes a duty on everyone, to use the resources carefully without any 
wastage, and protect them for the future generations. It also reminds everyone to ban 
illegal trafficking of human beings and the cruelest profession of prostitution in 
whatever form or method that is in existence. This article further guarantee, the rights 
of   people of third sex.  It imposes a responsibility on every one of us not to adopt or 
resort to any derogatory practices that affect the life, liberty, and freedom of others at 
any time. 
It also imposes a responsibility to protect the rights of mentally infirm people, old 
people, and all others who have no source of income generating capacity to be taken 
care by the society. If a state is unable to provide employment of any kind, it is the duty 
of the state to pay a minimum honorarium to lead a life. 
A great majority of population in many of the developing states are poor. It is the 
responsibility of these states to evole policies to provide better living conditions to their 
population to wipe out the tears from every human eye as parties to a number of 
human rights instruments.  Along with the states, we the people of the United Nations 
(especially the rich and other economically sound people including the private 
corporations) have also an onerous duty to share our resources to the extent possible to 
assist the people in need  and contribute our might for the development of society, and 
international community as members. In fact, many Non-Governmental 
Organizations, philanthropists are already involved in rendering their best. However, 
they are not adequate to meet the growing demands of people. It is the duty of every 
Focusing on the ways
and means by UNDP
Are we ready to achieve the
Millennium goals
78
one of us to render our best in extending a helping hand to the best possible extent.   
 This article confers the basic right to education to everyone. According to this, 
education should serve the purpose for which it is to pursue. This conjoins the saying 
and the philosophy advocated by Swami Vivekanda educating ourselves with values, 
morals and with a particular purpose to serve the needs of the society and as well 
oneself.  Knowledge is inherent in every body.  It can be sharpened only when it is 
tapped in a proper perspective. This article emphasis the importance of eduction as a 
tool to enrich people to enjoy their rights guaranteed both nationally and 
Internationally. Accordingly, it  aims to achieve the following goals. They are:
Article 26 (Right to Education) :
1. Everyone has the right to education. Education shall be free at least in the elementary 
and fundamental stages. Elementary education shall be compulsory. Technical and 
professional education shall be made generally available and higher education shall 
be equally accessible to all on the basis of  merit.
2.  Education shall be directed to the full development of  the human personality and to 
the strengthening of  respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. It shall 
promote understanding, tolerance and friendship among all nations racial or religious 
groups and shall further the activities of  the United Nations for the maintenance of  
peace.
3. Parents have a prior right to choose the kind of  education that shall be given to their 
children.
a) Education to everyone alone promotes the strengthening of  respect and helps for the 
promotion of  human rights and fundamental freedoms.
b) The full development of  the human personality and the sense of  its dignity could be 
achieved only when the significance of  human person is realized
c) It helps to understanding, tolerance, promotes gender equality and friendship with all 
other human beings across the world.
d) It promotes compassionate behavior towards other vulnerable groups, such as refugees, 
mentally and physically infirm people, old aged persons, children, and third sex and 
socially economically culturally disadvantaged sections, and promote to end racist, 
linguist, religious, etc.
e) It enables all people to take part freely and effectively in the development of  society 
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
79
and states, economically, politically, socially, legally and culturally.
f) Education alone provides a goal to achieve the objectives of  human rights, by 
inculcating values, morals, and ethical perspectives of  mankind.
g) It enables to achieve the United Nations and the Objective of  international law to 
establish peace and security on the globe.
Article 27 (Right to Culture) :
1. Everyone has the right freely to participate in the cultural life of  the community to 
enjoy the arts and to share in scientific advancement and its benefits.
2. Everyone has the right to the protection of  the moral and material interests resulting 
from any scientific literary or artistic product of  which he is the author.
In order to achieve these main goals which contribute for the furtherance of  
common brotherhood and one world concepts, the United Nations Education, 
Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) formulates a number of policies and 
programmes to help the states to achieve cent percent literacy. The UN Millennium 
Summit and the World Conference also highlighted the significance in no uncertain 
terms. Accordingly, the UN declared 2005-2014 as the Decade of Education for 
Sustainable Development. It hopes to achieve literacy to a maximum extent.  This 
article further highlights that though parents have the right to choose the kind of 
education that their children have to undertake, this doesn't mean that they have an 
absolute right to force the kind of education against the wishes of their children.In 
tune with the policy perspectives of the UN and other international organizations, the 
Government of India has adopted the Right to Education Act 2010, making education 
as a compulsory aspect for every citizen of India.
The UNESCO has a specific instruction to achieve the objects of this article. It 
has adopted a number of conventions dealing with various avocations for the 
promotion of cultural and scientific activities. According to this article, no one has a 
right to degrade the culture or any aspect of cultural perspective including language 
under any circumstances. Every culture of every society needs to be honoured, 
respected, and be promoted. The knowledge acquired through scientific and 
technological inputs need to be useful for the advancement of the rights and 
fundamental freedoms of mankind. It imposes an obligation on the states and 
individuals to share their scientific and technological skills for the development of 
mankind in whatever way it is possible.
80
In this regard, to promote the scientific and technological advancement, and to 
encourage individuals across the world, actively to involve in, for the promotion and 
dissemination of knowledge, the Intellectual property rights recognized by 
international law constitute as human rights, but not as monopoly or proprietary 
rights. The limited protection given to individuals is only in recognition of their hard 
work, for the promotion and advancement of scientific and technological knowledge. 
The recognition and such strict resume alone motivate individuals to undertake 
research for the furtherance of the development of the mankind and resources of the 
world. This provision is an extension the previous article of right to education as a 
human right.
This article makes it sure that the advancement of science and technology is only 
for the welfare of society in general and mankind in particular. Any advancement of 
science and technology that creates danger to the mankind is prohibited. In fact, 
international law of disarmament imposes a responsibility on states not to use their 
lethal and dangerous weapons, which may wipe out the mankind as a whole. It further 
reiterates, science and technology as a part and parcel of education and cultural 
human rights any invention should subserve the interests of mankind as a whole. 
Accordingly science & technology and practitioners of it has a wider responsibility to 
advance their knowledge to help the mankind to sustain peace and security and 
integrate with the objectives of the international community. 
This is the most important article of the Declaration. This article has both 
positive and negative aspects on the international community as a whole. On the 
positive side, it ensures the freedom of life and liberty to be enjoyed by every person as 
a subject of international community without any discrimination whatsoever it may 
be. 
On the negative side, it casts a responsibility on the nation-states to discharge 
their responsibilities, which they have voluntarily accepted to abide by the principles 
of international law . This article further, imposes responsibility on the international 
actors namely states, to evolve policy perspectives, developmental schemes and the 
necessity to evolve methods and techniques to share the resources of the world on an 
Article 28 (Social and International Order) :
Everyone is entitled to a social and international order in which the rights and 
freedoms set forth in this Declaration can be fully realized.
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
81
equitable basis. Inspite of generations of concentrated international action to 
development, the gap that exists between the rich and poor countries is widening 
instead of bridging it up. It brings forth the onerous task of the international 
community, including the UN to evolve more stringent steps and policies to evolve in 
nurturing the aspirations of the mankind, in the realization of fundamental freedoms 
for which they promised to live through international law . 
It further reiterates that it is the duty of the states, to abide by the principles of 
international law without any deviation, and observe the principles of various 
instruments of human rights by concentrated dialogue to adhere to all the instruments 
without resorting to reservations. It also imposes a responsibility on the   states, to stop 
all destructive efforts to human environment, peace, and security by strict adherence 
to the principles of international law of human rights. 
At the same time, it imposes an obligation on the people of each country to press 
for resolution of disputes between nation states, and to observe the human rights 
standards, which they have drafted or adopted. This means, the significance of 
Human Rights Education is an important aspect for the world community, to achieve 
the objectives of international law of human rights. It is the onerous duty of states to 
change their behavioral patterns with a common goal to wipe the tears of mankind and 
to save the succeeding generations not only from the scourge of war but from the 
economic, social and cultural inequality.
This article is the crucial one and the most important one to be followed by 
mankind, to realise and to enjoy the benefits of rights that are guaranteed in the 
Declaration.  This reiterates the significance of duties that play an important role in 
the promotion, exercise and the realization of human rights.  
Article 29 (Duties and Limitations):
1. Everyone has duties to the community in which alone the free and full development of  
his personality is possible.
2. In the exercise of  his rights and freedoms everyone shall be subject only to such 
limitations as are determined by law solely for the purpose of  securing due recognition 
and respect for the rights and freedoms of  others and of  meeting the just requirements 
of  morality, public order and general welfare in a democratic society.
3. These rights and freedoms may in no case be exercised contrary to the purposes and 
principles of  the United Nations.
82
This article again establishes the link between economic, social, and cultural 
rights and civil, and political rights, on one hand,  on the other hand,  the practice that 
the international community and individuals around the world need to observe strictly 
for the promotion of dignity of life, liberty, and freedom of every individual. An 
analysis of this article as discussed in unit two; imposes only responsibilities and not 
an automatic sanction of rights to be alone enjoyed. This further reiterates that the 
provisions stated in article 28 need to be strictly adhered by states in the better 
augmentation of the resources of the world community. 
This article recognized the principle of Lord Gautham Buddha that there is an 
inherent link exists between law , society, individual, and the world community. It is 
our duty to remember always that there is a continuous inter-relationship, 
indivisibility, interdependence, love and affection exists between individuals. The 
compassionate exercise of these aspects towards mankind with tolerance alone helps 
to achieve the full realization of human rights. The contemporary owes of the 
mankind are not  because of someone, but because of everyone of us for not adhering 
to duties, or sincerely discharging obligations that we owe as partners of society in the 
national and international community. 
The second paragraph imposes restrictions on the states too as actors of 
international community. States too as legal persons representing their people have to 
bear in always that it is their behavior at a higher place as sovereigns will only guide, 
and establish responsible national communities. They need to discharge their 
obligations and settle their disputes in good faith and as torch bearers of peace need to 
be rule bound in their relations rather than resort to political or any other 
considerations. If they observe human rights without any deviation in true spirit, then 
they could supervise the practices of their citizens, and could assist them in rendering 
their best assistance in the realization of fundamental freedoms.
Part three of the article, states that as members of the international community, 
both states and we the people of the United Nations only have responsibilities to 
discharge our duties, strictly adhering to the principles of the Charter.  If we deviate, 
then UN as a collective body cannot achieve the objects single handedly, and to blame 
it for the miseries or sorrows is of no consequence.
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
83
Article 30 (No Abuse of Rights) :
Nothing in this Declaration may be interpreted as implying for any state, group or 
person any right to engage in any activity or to perform any act aimed at the destruction of  
any of  the rights and freedoms set forth therein. 
Summary:
The last provision is the most important one, compared to all the articles set forth 
in the Declaration. from the picture it is clear that if any individual or state either 
interprets the provisions for their own selfish 
interests, it means only destruction of  the 
fundamental freedoms of the individual. This 
article enshrines that every time, all the actors need 
to act legally, and exercise their duties with great 
care and precision without any recklessness 
towards life, liberty, equality, and fraternity of 
others. 
 If any time any one of us  act with  selfish motives, or discharge our duties in  a 
negligent  manner, or discharge them without any adherence to respect for the rights 
of others,  it ultimately result in miseries. Further, the concepts of peace, security, and 
one world, or single mankind, freedoms of life, liberty, and equality remain as ideals 
alone. The deviation further results in bringing anarchical tendencies, and other 
associated miseries to mankind not only to present generations, but also for the future 
generations.
The last principle underlines once again, in theory and practices both the states 
and individuals as partners and actors of international community need to comply 
with the principles of law and justice with strict adherence. The  strict practice of 
duties  alone will bloom the culture of human rights. Such practices alone wipe the 
miseries of the contemporary world. This will result to achive long lasting solutions to 
establish peace and security. 
The concept of Human Rights was first stated in the Provisions of the Charter of 
the UN in 1945. In order to expand them, it later constituted a human rights 
committee. Basing on the draft prepared by the Committee on December 10, 1948 the 
General Assembly adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. As a mark of 
respect, every year, December 10 is celebrated as the Human Rights Day. 
84
The Declaration is a most significant one in the history of human rights. It 
constituted as a basis for the adoption of number of Declarations, Covenants, and 
Conventions on human rights. The expansion of this declaration later crystallized into 
Economic, Socio, and Cultural rights, Civil and Political Rights Covenants and 
Conventions of group rights such as women, children, disabled etc. The adoption of 
the declaration has brought in radical changes in the international and national legal 
arena. It recognises rights of both the nation-states and the individuals.  With its 
adoption, people across many of the colonies in the world could secure independence 
and establish a government of their choice. 
Every provision of the declaration innately advocates that everyone has a duty to 
discharge before claiming the right. If one is not able to discharge a duty, then the fruit 
of right is also imperfect. All the problems that are facing the world, especially, those 
of them identified in the Millennium goals are due to lack of strict adherence of duties. 
The efforts of the individual states led for the recognition of human rights in 
international law in 1945. The UN Charter adopted with an aim to protect and uplift 
the Human Rights of Individuals at all times. The UN in order to achieve these 
objectives adopted a number of Conventions, Covenants, Declarations, and 
resolutions. It has created an international mechanism, Commission on Human 
Rights ( presently referred to as Human Rights Council and a High Commissioner for 
Human Rights) to oversee the activities of the states and to protect the rights of the 
individuals. 
 Apart from the United Nations, it is the duty of nation-states and we the people 
of the United Nations to practice the culture of human rights. It implies subtly that 
every one of us (individuals and States), both at the national and international 
scenario need to discharge our duties at all times without any deviance. The strict 
adherence to human rights alone would end the maladies of the present day world and 
bring back the glory of respect to humanity and mankind. Only then, it would be 
possible to claim, liberty, equality, freedom of speech and expression the way they 
have been crafted to achieve the ideals of peace and security to mankind.  
Near home, a number of ancient texts and philosophers have advocated the same 
for the promotion of the concept of one world with a harmonious society of living in 
Unity and diversity. If we practice at the national level, certainly it will have an impact 
CONCLUSION
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
85
on the course of action in the psychological behaviour of states to stop the practice of 
Machiavellian tactics in their international relations with each other and to follow 
strictly human rights. 
The strict adherence to human rights is nothing but to adopt oneself to the value 
system either at the individual level or at societial level would only envisage in realising 
the objectives of human rights.
With these objectives, a number of efforts are initiated across the World for the 
dissemination and propagation of human rights for their better augmentation. With 
the same motive, to help the polity of India to regain its glorious Past, and to achieve 
the Sarvodaya Concept of the Father of the Nation, Mahatma Gandhi, (which in turn 
led the international community to emulate) and to secure the concept of  social 
justice of Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, the University of Pune's  this programme is to be 
appreciated for inculcating the culture of human rights, to its young battalion of 
students, to mould them as responsible future citizens. 
86
One Word Answer Questions
1. On which organ of the UN does Art 13 the Charter  impose responsibility for 
the promotion of human rights?
2.  What is signified by Bonder Labour ?
3.  The International Criminal Court is Located in which Country?
4. Double Jeopardy means………..
5.  Which organisation of UN Deals with the rights of Labour?
Multiple Choice Questions:
1. In which year was the UDHR was adopted by the United Nations?
2. Which article deals with the concept of Slavery?
3. Who donated the peace bell to the United Nations?
4.  Who was the Chairman of  drafting Committee of  UDHR?
5. In which year was the World Conference on Human Rights was 
conducted?
Answers : 1) B 2) D 3) B 4) C 5) A
(A) General Assembly
(A) Debt to a Rich Man
(A)  The Netherlands ( Remember if Netherlands is written
without  The, The answer will be wrong)
(A) No punishment twice for a same offence
(A) International Labour Organisation
(A) 1947 (B) 1948 (C) 1945 (D) 1984
(A) Article 3  (B) Article 5 (C) Article 6 (D) Article 4
(A) Kapil Dev (B) Sachin Tendulkar (C) Vinod Kamble (D) George Bush
(A) Margret Thatcher (B) Indira Gandhi (C) Eleanor Roosevelt
(D)  Srimavo Bandaranayke
(A) 1993 (B) 1992 (C) 1995 (D) 1996
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
87
General Information
ANNEXURE
Suggestive Reading Materials:
1. Books
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m
The Model questions given in each Unit is indicative in nature only. They may 
consist more than these two patterns.  They may be matching, are asking questions by 
giving a paragraph, and answer the questions from that paragraph, or logical questions 
etc. All thes will be only in this format of ticking as they need to be evaluated by a 
computer. No written answer questions will be there. 
Vast literature is available on Human Rights. The few reading specified here only are 
suggestive:
Leah Levin: Human Rights ( Questions and Answers)  National Book Trust 
India, New Delhi, 1992 
ABC Teaching of Human Rights: Centre for Human Rights, UN Publication, 
NewYork, 1989
Rokeah,M: The Nature of Human Values, New York: The Free Press, 1973 
Malcolm N. Shaw , International Law , Sixth Edition, Cambridge University 
Press. (Chapter VI- The international protection of Human rights, and VII- the 
regional protection of Human rights.) , 2008
L. Oppenhim: International Law ( Edited by Sir Robert Jennings and Sir Arthur 
Watts) 9th edition Vol.1 Part 2 to 4 Chapter 8 for Human Rights  Chapter 14 & 15 
for International Legal Instruments, 1992, Longman , London
Ishay: Human Rights Reader; Routledge (second Edition) 2007
Encyclopedia of Human Rights : 5 volumes; Oxford University Press; 2009
Daniel Fishlin & Marth Nandorfy: The concise guide to Global Human Rights;  
Oxford University Press;   2007
Justice D.M. Dharmadikari: Human Values and Human Rights: Universal 
Publications, New Delhi,2010
Jaswal S.S., Introduction to Human Rights and Duties, Vikas Publishing Hours 
Pvt. Ltd.,
m
m
88
2. Journals and Documents :
m
m
m
m
m
m
 
UN General Assembly Resolution on Human Rights Education: 
A/59/525/Rev .1 dated 2 March,2005Marko Milanovic: Is the Rome Statute 
Binding on Individuals?(And Why we Should Care) Journal of International 
Criminal Justice vol.9, 2011,25-52
Christine Min Wotipka and Kiyoteru Tsutsui: Global Human rights and State 
Sovereignty: State Ratification of International Human Rights Treties,1965-
2001; Sociological Forum; Vol,23; No.4 2008,724-752
R.B. BRandit: The Concept of Obligation and Duty; Mind, Oxford Journals, 
Vol. 73, No. 291, July 1964; pp..374-393 
John H. Knox: Horizontal Human Rights Law; The American Journal of 
International Law , Vol.102, 2008, p.1-47
Joan Mesquida Sampol: Duty Moral and Political; http://ivr-
enc.info/index.php?title=Duty-Moral and Political    \
Syela BenHabib  Another Universalism: On the Unity and Diversity of Human 
Rights; ,Proceedings and   Address of the American Philosophical Association; 
81, No. 2, 2007, 1-32 available on the JSTOR  journals blog 
American Consulate Library: Human Rights Education , 2002
Reports :  
mfor cases of various courts see : All India Reporter, Superme Court Cases, 
Weekly Law Reports, etc. may be consuleted.
mReports of the National Police Commission.
mReports of the National Human Rights Commission.
mUN Human Rights Council and Other Organs of the UN at indepandent 
websites of each organisation.
mReports of various Non-Governmental Organisations such as Amensty 
International, Human Rights Watch, PUCL, Commonwealth Human Rights 
Association etc. 
m
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
89
3. Referance of Acknowledgement of Web Sites :
Human Rights (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy;
 http://www . plato.stanford.edu/entries/right-human also see for values, Rights the above 
web address.  http://www .Wikipedia.  
 Andrew Clapham : Human Rights Lexion, Oxofrd University Press; 2005; also see Human 
Rights A very short Introduction; 2007, Oxford University Press
Magdalena Sepulveda and others: Human Rights : Reference Hand Book, 2004 University for 
Peace of the United Nations
http://www .Un.Org see the section on Human Rights and the various links provided by UN.
 Wikipedia the free encyclopedia of the Web Campbell, Kenneth, "Legal Rights", The 
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2011 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = 
<http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2011/entries/legal-rights
s i t e s h t t p : / / r e s o u r c e s . l a w y e r s n j u r i s t s . c o m / r e s e a r c h -
papers/assignments/law/jurisprudence/hohfeld%E2%80%99s-analysis-of-irghts 
http://www .newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Info:Main_Page
http://www .newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Info:Main_Page
http://mshrc.maharashtra.gov .in/Article/upload/TheImportanceofH.R.Education%20%2
0.pdf
References of acknowledgement of the web pages for images inserted in the study material. 
pbcopelika.org
http://www.freshnetworks.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2010/11/photo-
online_community.jpg
http://possibilitiesunlimited.files.wordpress.com/2011/02/community.jpg
http://www .aishdas.org/gallery/Community.jpg
http://international.phillipmartin.info/intl_global_community.gif
http://www .personal.psu.edu/users/s/a/sam50/Human%20Rights%20Abuse.jpg
http://www.onedayforhumanrights.com/wp-content/uploads/2008/11/universal-
declaration-of-human-rights.jpg
90
http://www .mynews.in/dailyimage/news/peace.jpg
http://c.tadst.com/gfx/stock/human-rights-day.jpg
http://www .humanrightsinternational.org/fileadmin/user_upload/495x268/iStock_00000
2055601Small.jpg
http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/e/ea/United_Nations_Human_Rights
_Council_Logo.svg/220px-United_Nations_Human_Rights_Council_Logo.svg.png
http://www .gaypasg.org/gaypasg/PressClippings/2006/Dec/UN%20logo.jpg
http://www .wnd.com/images/UnitedNations1.jpg
http://www .norwayosce.org/NR/rdonlyres/1BCD8E86E48048009D26C44287A4C90A/121265/3261
66.jpg
http://www .humanrights.com/sites/default/files/dove.jpg
http://nation.com.pk/uploads/news_image/large/LibyasuspendedfromUNHumanRights
Council_20135.jpg
http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fe/UN_Members_Flags.JPG
/800px-UN_Members_Flags.JPG
http://www .financialpost.com/todays-paper/4978128.bin?size=620x465
http://www .un.org/cyberschoolbus/untour/imgjap.jpg
http://spaceformusic.com/symposium2000/images/bellrendering.jpg
http://3.bp.blogspot.com/_XxAah_3epfI/TQEj7Bv_NXI/AAAAAAAABNg/kQSHPiuv
zIY/s1600/HUMAN%2BRIGHTS%2BFOR%2BALL.gif
http://www.presentationsistersunion.org/_uploads/fckpg/HumanDignityHumanRights_
W_9.jpg
http://www .farmingfirst.org/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2010/09/mdg_logo.jpg
http://www .iowaepiscopal.org/images/photos/mdgcross.jpg
http://www.tidec.org/Visuals/Tidetalk/Network%20articles/Millenium%20goals/web-
mill-goals.gif
http://www .un.am/thumb.php?file=2437&width=480&height=640
http://www .essex.ac.uk/eo/stylesheets/Different%20People%20Poster%20cropped.JPG
Introduction to Human Rights & Duties 
91
http://www .antislavery.org/images/2008/b/2_bonded_labour_family_sq.jpg
http://www .cfob.org/images/labor1.jpg
http://3.bp.blogspot.com/_lDmEgaE9Tek/TKFOQXci2DI/AAAAAAAAADI/bIWeIcp
Kfv4/s1600/couvert-depliant-cover-guide2-eng.jpg
http://www .trivester.com/static/images/news/human_trafficking_slavery.png
http://news4u.co.in/human%20trafficking%20victims.jpg
http://etc.usf.edu/clipart/49600/49653/49653_free_mason_lg.gif
h t t p : / / w w w. u n i t y c o r p s . o r g / i m a g e s / u n i t y - a r t / 2 0 0 4 / w i n t e r / s o n i a -
jimenez/unity_432x328.jpg
http://www .indiamike.com/india/attachments/6888d1197803283-andaman-trip-report-
and-photos-cellular-jail.jpg
http://notenoughgood.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/06/man-behind-
bars_bxp357761.jpg
http://3.bp.blogspot.com/_HoDij8Z2tHY/S5E3vR0OSYI/AAAAAAAADzM/zG9XO7
2XFOs/s320/Chart+of+Human+Rights.jpg
http://cache2.allpostersimages.com/p/LRG/37/3790/2HEIF00Z/posters/morse-ralph-
s c e n e - i n - t h e - c o u r t r o o m - d u r i n g - t h e - 3 r d - d ay - s e s  s i o n - o f - t h e - nu r e m b e r g -
trial.jpghttp://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/58/IMTFE_court_
chamber.jpg/300px-IMTFE_court_chamber.jpg 
h t t p : / / d a c c e s s - d d s -
ny.un.org/doc//UNDOC/GEN/N99/770/89/PDF/N9977089.pdf?OpenElement)
92

This chart is a sum up of  the rights discussed above.
About the Author
Dr.T.S.N.Sastry is a senior teacher spanning over more than 
two decades of teaching, and research experience , especially in the 
fields of international law and human rights. He authored a book on 
International Law of State Succession, and edited three books on 
Human Rights and Constitution. He Published a number of  
research papers in journals of repute on International Law , Human 
Rights and Constitution of India. He is currently an academic  
fellow of the Erasmus Mundus External Window Lot 13. Dr. Sastry 
delivered lectures on various areas of international law , human rights 
in a number of Indian and foreign Universities. He was the fellow 
under the cultural exchange programme of the Government of 
France. He received Vijaya Shree Award from the India 
International Friendship Society, New Delhi in 2005 for his efforts 
for the propagation of Human Rights Education. 
Dr. Sastry was responsible in establishing the UGC Centre for 
Human Rights and Duties Education in 1997 in the Pondicherry 
University. As a founder coordinator of the centre, he conducted a 
number of programmes, seminars, and conferences for the 
propagation of human rights, apart from the academic programmes 
leading to research and teaching in human rights.  He served as 
Dean, Director, and Controller of Examinations and as a member of 
a number of academic bodies. Presently he is the Academic Council 
Member and Visiting Professor of the Chanakya National Law 
University, Patna.
Dr. Sastry conducted a number of seminars, and the founder of 
the Post Graduate Moot Court Competition, and a Placement Cell 
in the traditional set up of Law Departments in a University system.
