HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE & 
DISADVANTAGED GROUPS 
COURSE BOOK - II
{dÚmnrR> JrV
kmZ ~Zmo H$_©erb, H$_© kmZdmZ
nwÊ`_`r Xo Amåhm Aja daXmZ
kmZ ~Zmo H$_©erb, H$_© kmZdmZ
Om{V^oX, Y_©^oX, d§e^oX Xoa
bmI bmI H§$R>mVw{Z hmM EH$ gya
H$éUoÀ`m MaUm§er ZV hmo {ZkmZ
_mUwgH$s Y_m©Mm AW© OmUVmo
l_{ZîR>m ho n{dÌ VrW© _mZVmo
•X`mVw{Z g_VoMm {Z^©` A{^_mZ
godoVM _wºr hr _§Jb Xrjm
Ý`m`mñVd OmJ¥{V hr gËdnarjm
ho {dûd{M Ka A_wMo _§Ì hm _hmZ
_§Joe nmS>Jm§dH$a
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE & 
DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
COURSE BOOK - II
Dr. T. S. N. Sastry
Professor & Head, 
Co-ordinator, HRE Programme
University of Pune
Department of Law
INTRODUCTION
Dr. W. N. Gade
Vice Chancellor
University of Pune
Published by :
Registrar,
University of Pune.
Ganeshkhind Pune - 411 007.
University of Pune
First Edition 2012
No part of this book or the slides shall be reproduced in any manner without the prior 
permission of the University of Pune
University of Pune Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of URLs 
for external or third-party internet website referred to in this publication and does not 
guarantee that any content on such websites is or will remain, accurate or appropriate.
August 2012
©
PREFACE
INTRODUCTION 
SYLLABI OF THE COURSE
INTRODUCTION 11
(A) HUMAN RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN 27
(B) HUMAN RIGHTS AND CHILDREN 44
UNIT I
UNIT II
1. Meaning of Vulnerable and Disadvantaged Groups
2. Concept of Vulnerable 
1. Human Rights and Women's Rights  
2. International Scenario
3. Supervision
4. World Conferences on Women
5. International Women's Day
6. National Standards
7. National Policy for Women
8. Sum up
1. Child Rights: Efforts of the International Community 
2. Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) 1989
3. UN Organs concerned Directly with the Rights of Children
4. Brief overview of UNICEF ( United Nations Children's Fund)
5. World Children's Day
6. National Scenario of Children and Legal Position
7. Legal provisions governing the rights of Children
8. National Commission for the protection of  Child Rights
9. Sum up
and Disadvantaged Groups
C O N T E N T S
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
UNIT III
STATUS AND RIGHTS OF SOCIALLY 63
ECONOMICALLY DISADVANTAGED PEOPLE
HUMAN RIGHTS AND VULNERABLE GROUPS
(A) STATELESS PERSONS 91
AND 
1. Status of Indigenous People and the role of UN
2. Role of UN
3. UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples 2007
4. SC/ ST and other indigenous peoples in the Indian Legal scenario
5. Scheduled Tribes
6. Rights of the Elderly Persons 
7. International Scenario
8. Indian Scenario
9. Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act-
2007
10. Rights of Persons with Disability
11. Definition of Disability
12. UN and the Disabled
13. Rights of persons with disability in India
14. Laws Relating to Disabled
15. The Minorities and human rights
16. The Efforts of the International Community
17. Minorities and India
18. Constitutional rights and safeguards provided to the minorities in 
India
19. National Commission for Minorities - India
20. Ministry of Minority Affairs - Government of India
21. Sum Up
1. Stateless persons
2. Concept of Nationality and Citizenship
UNIT IV
HUMAN RIGHTS AND VULANERABLE GROUPS
COURSE BOOK -II
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
3. Concept and Causes of Statelessness
4. Statelessness and International Legal Standards
5. Consequences of Statelessness on Human Rights
6. Some Current Challanges
7. Sum UP
1. Definition of Sex Work
2. Sex Workers and International Efforts
3. Indian Scenario
4. Sum UP
1. International Efforts
2. Migrant Workers in India
3. Sum UP
1. International Efforts
2. Human rights Violations Faced by HIV/AIDS People
3. National Scenario
4. Sum Up
(B) SEX WORKERS 98
(C) MIGRANT WORKERS 102
(D) HIV/AIDS VICTIMS 105
CONCLUSION 108
SUGGESTIVE READINGS 110
REFERENCES 111
HUMAN RIGHTS AND VULANERABLE GROUPS
COURSE BOOK -II
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
SYLLABI
Meaning and Concept of Vulnerable and Disadvantaged 
Groups, Customary, Socio-Economic and Cultural Problems of 
Vulnerable and Disadvantaged Groups
 
Human Rights and Women's Rights –International and National 
Standards
Human Rights of Children-International and National 
Standards
Status of Indigenous People and the Role of the UN
Status of SC/ST and Other Indigenous People in the Indian 
Scenario 
Human Rights of Aged and Disabled
The Minorities and Human Rights
Stateless Persons
Sex Workers
Migrant Workers
HIV/AIDS Victims
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED 
GROUPS
I GENERAL INTRODUCTION
II SOCIAL STATUS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN IN 
INTERNATIONAL AND NATIONAL PERSPECTIVE
III STATUS OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMICALLY 
DISADVANTAGED PEOPLE
IV HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE GROUPS
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
Human Rights have never shown any kind of 
discrimination towards any individual or group of people. 
They apply equally to any country or culture without any bias 
on grounds of sex, race, religion, caste or community and 
language. They only advocate the welfare and well-being of 
all persons with equal treatment everywhere at all times. 
However, the socio-economic, political and cultural 
diversities, prevailing in each state across the world, and 
politics of the nation states, deprive the free exercise of human rights to a certain 
number of people. Any type of deprivation, which has a direct bearing on the right to 
life and dignity of people, certainly deprives them of the enjoyment of their 
guaranteed human rights. Such deprived people are normally referred to as 
vulnerable groups and disadvantaged communities or groups.
In the realm of International Law of Human Rights, these groups are broadly 
classified as women, refugees, disabled, internally displaced persons, HIV/AIDS 
victims, Migrant workers, minorities, mentally ill persons, trafficked persons, and 
sexual minorities' et.al.  In order to assist them to augment the rights guaranteed to 
everyone, the United Nations had adopted a number of specific international 
conventions and declarations with an aim to fix responsibility on the nation-states to 
take care of their rights. Based on the mandate, the regional organizations, such as 
European Union, the Organisation of American States, African Union, and national 
governments have initiated a number of welfare schemes. However, due to poverty 
and other cross-cultural social problems many a times, a majority of vulnerable 
people are not able to access their basic needs, in spite of the efforts both at the 
international and national plane.       
To wipe out the miseries of these people, and to help them to achieve the 
equal status with that of the developed sections of a society, it is the responsibility of 
both nation-states and individuals to extend a helping hand to the extent possible to 
uplift them in realizing their rights. With this aim, this second book in the series of the 
PREFACE

human rights education programme will deal with the issues of some of the 
vulnerable groups in general and specific to that of Indian context by taking into 
consideration of the heterogeneous group of students of the University. 
The objective of the Project of Human Rights Education for all 
initiated by the University, is only for promotion and propagation of Human Rights. 
There is no profit making aspect involved. The pictures presented are used from the 
various web resources of the UN and its organs, International, National, Non-
Governmental Organisations, search engines and other websites sites to convey the 
message of Human Rights in an easy and understandable manner. In this regard the 
author expresses his gratitude to all the authors whose materials have consulted and 
whose websites we have browsed.
In this regard, I am grateful to the authorities of European Parliament and 
European Commission for providing the fellowship of the Erasmus Mundus Lot 13 
of India to visit and access the materials and other research facilities of the University 
of Lund, Sweden, during my stay in 2010 and 2011, at the Centre for East and South 
Asian studies. I am also highly grateful to Prof Roger Greatrex, Director of the 
Centre for East and South Asian Studies and Dr Sidsel Hansson, Coordinator of the 
Erasmus Mundus Programme and Lecturer at the Centre for East and South Asian 
studies of the Lund University for their cooperation and encouragement .
I express my sincere thanks to all the authorities of the University of Pune and 
the Hon'ble Vice Chancellor Dr. W.S. Gade for reposing the trust and permitting me 
to continue my work as a coordinator of the HRE programme of the University. I am 
indebted to the former Vice Chancellors of the University, Dr R. K. Shevagonkar and 
Dr Sanjay Chhande for their constant encouragement and vision in the promotion of 
the Programme. I also sincerely express my thanks to all the members of the HRE 
programme of the University, and to all my colleagues of the University for seriously 
implementing the programme and making it a grand success.
I express my sincere thanks to the Dr. Sharmila Rege, Director of the 
Krantijyoti Savitribai Phule Women's Studies Centre and her colleagues for offering 
their revered comments and suggestions on the rough draft of this work. I take this 
opportunity to thank many of our well wishers and friends, especially Dr. Sadiq 
Jiliani Ahmad Syed, Senior Diplomat of the UN for patiently going through the script 
and for offering his valuable suggestions and corrections.  I also express my thanks to 
Prof. Y.S.R. Murty, Registrar, Jindal Global Law University, Haryana for offering the 
necessary feedback during the preparation of the work. I express my Sincere thanks 
to Miss. Priyanka Jawale, Teaching Associate and to my students Mr. Dormaan 
Jamshid Dalal and Mr. Meghanad Karle for their constant support in many ways and 
means during the preparation of the book. I extend my thanks to the Director and 
Staff of the EMRC for recording the lectures of the first book and looking forward for 
the same cooperation for the remaining volumes. I am also thankful to the faculty and 
non-teaching staff of the Department of Law of the University of Pune, who have 
extended their support in authoring the book. I express my sincere thanks to Dr. S. R. 
Bhosale, Chairman, Board of Studies, Faculty of Law and Dr. Rasheed Shaikh, Dean 
Faculty of Law, University of Pune, the administrative authorities of Pune University 
for their overall support and to Mr. Dattatraya Kute, Manager and staff of the 
University of Pune Press for publishing this book with utmost sincerity.  
The cover page photograph is adopted from the United Nations Website, for 
which we express our sincere gratitude.
Last but not the least if any, unintentional errors are crept in I am alone 
responsible. Your valuable comments and suggestions if any with respect to the 
improvement of content and quality of work will be highly appreciated.
Date : 30/08/2012            
Dr.T.S.N.Sastry
Head Department of Law and Cooridnator,
Human Rights Education Programme
University of pune 
This book on ‘Human Rights of Vulnerable and 
Disadvantaged Groups’ is the second in the Series of the 
Human Rights Education Programme. The objective of the 
United Nations, and International Law of Human Rights, is 
to provide a stable and peaceful life to every individual, 
without any kind of discrimination, wherein, the rights 
guaranteed legally need to be adhered for their realization 
and to establish a borderless world. To achieve these 
objectives, nation-states have adopted a number of legal texts 
and evolved specific policies to help vulnerable groups  to 
realize and enjoy legally guaranteed basic minimum rights at the international and 
national realm.
However, the political, social, economic and cultural inequalities present in 
each society many a times, hamper the rights of the weaker sections of a society, 
thereby obstructing them from fully realizing their rights. In spite of clearly 
articulating the parameters of equality and non-discrimination on any count, 
discrimination based on gender, race, language, and on other counts still prevail in 
various societies around the World. Taking into consideration various prevailing 
circumstances, the international community extended concessions to the vulnerable 
groups or disadvantaged people across the world, not only to remove the apparent 
deficiencies in the realisation of their legally guaranteed human rights, but also to 
make them self- sufficient in exercise of their rights on an equal footing.
In the Indian context, the Constitution of India guaranteed to all the people of 
India, civil, political, economic, social, and cultural rights for their realization by all 
sections of the polity without any kind of discrimination. However, due to poverty, 
customary and cultural practices prevalent in the country, equal opportunity has been 
denied to various categories of people that have prevented them from enjoying their 
rights equally on par with other developed sections of the society. There are various 
disadvantaged groups of people such as women, children, Scheduled Castes, 
Scheduled Tribes, Linguistic Minorities, Religious Minorities, Sexual Minorities 
etc.  In order to augment their rights, the Constitution of India has provided a number 
of concessions to protect them from exploitation by other groups. However, from a 
variety of discriminatory practices that are prevalent against the above groups, it has 
been apparent that the existing environment for the free exercise of rights is in some 
way deficient. In order to bridge the gaps in the social system, the Legislature has 
adopted a number of progressive legislation extending concessions to augment the 
rights of these people. The Judiciary too in a number of cases has liberally interpreted 
INTRODUCTION

the provisions of the Constitution and various legislation to uplift the rights of the 
vulnerable groups. The vivid expansion of Public Interest Litigation or Social Action 
Litigation by the Supreme Court of India is a welcoming feature, compared to its 
counterparts across the world, to augment the rights of vulnerable groups. 
Education is a vital tool to address many problems in any society. India is on 
the threshold of establishing itself as an economic power in the years to come. 
Therefore, the aim of the University is to equip its students to understand and spread 
the message of human rights. These rights will in turn certainly, help to evolve 
effective solutions to wipe out the tears from every eye of the millions of people 
whose rights are adversely affected, and who do not have at their disposal adequate 
knowledge and tools for the realization of their legally guaranteed rights.  Apart from 
the above, equipping the younger generations would indeed, strengthen the justice 
delivery system in a more coherent manner. Taking into consideration the above-
mentioned objectives, and the interdisciplinary nature of the pupil, this book 
addresses the various issues affecting the vulnerable and disadvantaged people in a 
concise, easy and understandable mode on the lines of the first book, Introduction to 
Human Rights and Duties.  
In this regard, I thank His Excellency, Hon'ble Governor of Maharashtra, 
Shri. K. Sankaranarayanan for his vision and commitment in the promotion of 
Human Rights Education to the younger generations of the nation. I am also thankful 
to the Government of Maharashtra for evincing its interest in the promotion of 
Human Rights Education for all. I extend my thanks to all the authorities of the 
University for granting permission to launch the programme across the Departments. 
I also extend my thanks to the members of the Human Rights Education Committee 
for their rich contribution in making the programme a success. Last but not the least,  
I appreciate the untiring efforts of the coordinator of the programme, Dr. T.S.N. 
Sastry, Prof. & Head, Department of Law, and its faculty, staff and students for their 
continuous sustained support. 
            The University being the first in the country to offer this type of programme 
with the blessings of the Government of Maharashtra, I sincerely hope that other 
Universities and Institutions in the country and in the State of Maharashtra will 
follow suit in order to inculcate the values of philosophy of Human Rights amongst 
the youth.
Date : 4/09/2012
Dr W. N. Gade
Vice Chancellor 
University of Pune

11
The meaning of vulnerable is highly evasive. However, in common 
understanding, people who are easily susceptible to physical or emotional injury, or 
subject to unnecessary criticism, or in a less advantageous position in any society 
may be defined as vulnerable people. Accordingly, vulnerable groups are those 
groups of people who may find it difficult to lead a comfortable life, and lack 
developmental opportunities due to their disadvantageous positions. Further, due to 
adverse socio-economical, cultural, and other practices present in each society, they 
find it difficult many a times to exercise their human rights fully.
In the language of human rights vulnerable groups may be defined as, certain 
groups of population who often encounter discriminatory treatment, or need some 
kind of special attention for protection of the State to avoid exploitation or from a 
harmful environment. 
People who are discriminated based on sex, race, by birth in a particular 
community, religious or disability or any other criteria that is specific to each society 
may generally described as disadvantaged people.   
According to European Foundation for the improvement of living Working 
Conditions, vulnerable people means : 
“Groups that experience a higher risk of poverty and social exclusion than the 
general population, ethnic minorities, migrants, disabled people, the homeless, those 
This Unit will introduce to the students the meaning and idea of vulnerable 
and disadvantaged groups. It will focus on the Social, Economical and Cultural 
problems generally faced by these groups. Human rights universally recognise the 
realisation of rights by all sections of people without any discrimination. However, 
many a times, due to a number of adverse social, economic, cultural aspects, which 
play a vital role in the realisation of the rights, the vulnerable and disadvantaged 
groups are often not in a position to exercise their rights freely. Accordingly, this unit 
will introduce to the student vulnerable and disadvantaged groups, classification 
and the problems affecting these groups in a subtle perspective.
1.  Meaning  of  Vulnerable groups
Unit-IMeaning and Concept of Vulnerable Groups
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
12
struggling with substance abuse, isolated elderly people and children all often face 
difficulties that can lead to further social exclusion, such as low levels of education 
and unemployment or  underemployment, refugees, stateless persons, victims of war 
are described as vulnerable groups".
According to the general perspective of International Law of Human Rights, 
disadvantaged groups are the people who are denied free access to the guaranteed 
rights in their free exercise.
Based on the socio, economic, cultural perspectives, the classification of 
these groups vary from country to country. In general, women, children, socially, 
economically, culturally deprived sections, disabled, minorities etc. form part of 
disadvantaged groups. Poverty is the main contributing factor towards degradation 
of the status of these people that are classified as disadvantaged groups.
The above definitions are only illustrative in nature. Despite the commitment 
of International Law of Human Rights towards the promotion and protection of 
rights of these groups, there is no agreed standard definition, concept, or standard 
classification of list of people who are to be classified as vulnerable and 
disadvantaged groups. 
MEANING OF DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
2.  Concept of vulnerable and Disadvantaged Groups 
Direct Discrimination : 
Indirect Discrimination : 
The concept of vulnerable and disadvantaged groups is as old as human 
history. From ancient to modern times in every society, number of instances could be 
found where in a section of people in each society are given a different kind of 
treatment. In general, the discrimination often based on humiliation, harassment, 
intimidation, through social, political, economical, customary, and cultural factors. 
The idea behind such practices is to keep away such people from the forefront of the 
social activities and deprive them of their life and liberty. Further, keeping them 
aloof, depriving their economic, intellectual capacities to sub serve the needs of the 
rich and dominant people of a society.
 Discrimination normally constitutes two types. One is direct discrimination, 
and the other is indirect discrimination. 
It means any person or groups of people treated less favorably, and easily 
exposed to societal risk. In this process, many a times, these people encounter 
difficulties in exercising their legal rights freely as guaranteed by both International 
Law of Human Rights and by the Constitution of a country.
Any practice employed intentionally or unintentionally which exposes 
people of a particular category to specific disadvantageous situation compared with 
others, unless it is objectively justified by a legitimate aim and the means of 
achieving that aim are appropriate. 
In both the aspects, harassment is the common factor. This is because of 
segregation of specific group of people with an aim to deprive their dignity in order to 
create an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating, or offensive environment in 
every moment of their life. 
The economic factor contributes for the cause of vulnerability of people. 
However it cannot include other aspects of discrimination based on gender, 
disability, social, cultural, customary, caste and other types of discriminatory 
practices that are prevalent in each society. Apparently, an economic criterion alone 
13
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
14
projects a narrow outlook in the determination of vulnerable and disadvantaged 
groups. In order to measure the vulanerability in a holistic perspective, it has to be 
evaluated from social availability of resources along with consumption, health, 
conventional traditions, practices that are followed in each society. This type of 
criteria adopted in each society could alone provide a viable classification of 
vulnerable  and disadvantaged groups.    
In order to halt such practices and to wipe out the miseries of groups of such 
unfavorable alienated people around the World, the international community of 
nation-states adopted a number of documents in tune with International Law of 
Human Rights to extend protection to everyone without any kind of discrimination 
whatsoever. 
Human Rights place duties on the individuals, and states to eradicate all types 
of discriminatory practices that are adopted towards those people who are weak, 
oppressed on any count. However, due to poverty and other social, cultural 
barricades that exist in each society, there are millions of people not able to enjoy 
their basic rights, equally with that of progressive sections. Apart from the 
individual, social, and customary practices followed in each society, the politics and 
policies of nation-states also contribute largely, for the vulanerability and 
disadvantaged  of large number of people around the World.
In view of the existence of large number of vulnerable  and disadvantaged 
people, International Law of Human Rights extends special considerations for the 
promotion and protection of their rights and works towards eradication of 
discriminations. Accordingly, the United Nations has adopted a number of 
Declarations, Conventions, and Covenants to uplift the rights of these people. It also 
established special commissions and organisations to deal with the rights of such 
people whose rights are at jeopardy.     
Due to lack of an acceptable definition, many a times, the UN bodies work on 
ad-hoc basis to augment the rights of disadvantaged people. The United Nations and 
its other bodies including the Human Rights Council regularly adopt a number of 
guidelines for implementation by the states in their efforts to curb the threats against 
the disadvantaged people. 
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
15
Women and Girls :  
Children : 
Refugees : 
Women and girls are normally in a 
disadvantageous position all over the World. 
However, compared to developed countries, they are 
in a more disadvantageous position in developing 
countries due to abject poverty, other social, cultural, 
and derogatory customary practices adopted in each 
country.
Children again are the most disadvantaged 
people in the World. Children of developing countries, 
compared to developed countries face a number of 
problems, such as poverty, malnutrition, and other 
socio, economic, cultural abuses. 
Refugees means, persons who migrate from their country to another country 
to seek temporary shelter; due to adverse events such as famine, persecution, 
religious intolerance, racial discrimination or any other reason. Such people are 
unable to exercise freely all the human rights guaranteed in their own country or in a 

HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
16
foreign territory wherein they reside temporarily. 
According to the  as 
defined (in Article 1A) a refugee means:
“Any person who, owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of 
race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political 
opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, 
is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country; or who, not having a 
nationality and being outside the country of his former habitual residence, is unable 
or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to it.”
People who are forced to leave their home and place of residence due to 
adverse affects or events that take place in their habitual dwelling are described as 
Internally Displaced Persons. 
These people normally take 
shelter in their own country 
away from their habitual place 
of residence.  They do not fall 
under the category of 
refugees. 
There is no exact 
definition defining Internally 
Displaced Persons. However, 
according to UN Principles of 
Internal Displacement, an IDP 
means: ‘internally displaced persons are persons or groups of persons who have been 
forced or obliged to flee or to leave their homes or places of habitual residence, in 
particular as a result of or in order to avoid the effects of armed conflict, situations of 
generalized violence, violations of human rights or natural or human-made disasters, 
and who have not crossed an internationally recognized State border.’
 Statelessness is a major problem. It arises due to a number of reasons 
United Nations Convention on the Refugees 1951,
Internally Displaced Persons:  
Statelessness :

including discrimination against minority 
groups in a nation, failure to include all 
residents in the body of citizens when a state 
become independent, or takes birth as a new 
state according to law of state succession in 
International Law  and or due to conflict 
between states. 
Statelessness means any person or 
group of persons who do not possess the 
nationality of any state. These people are 
highly vulnerable in the free exercise of their 
human rights, since they do not possess 
nationality of any country. 
All those people who do not form part of majority population of a country 
could be classified as national minorities. The classification may be based on 
religion, ethnicity, language or any other factors. 
The United Nations adopted a number of declarations to protect rights and 
appointed several commissions to augment the rights of these people. It adopted a 
specific declaration on 18th December in 1992. According to the declaration, it is the 
duty of every state to protect the Ethnic, Cultural, Religious, and Linguistic minority 
rights without any deviance 
at all times. Until date there 
is no specific convention 
adopted dealing with the 
rights of these people. 
The term migrant 
worker has different 
meaning and connotations 
in various parts of the world. 
It refers to both international 
National Minorities:  
Migrant Workers : 
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
17
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
and national migrants. This is because, in view of economic globalization, 
unemployment, poverty in many developing countries people moves in search of a 
job from one country to another country. In view of migration, these workers enjoy 
little or no social protection in a country where they reside. Many a time women, 
children and other vulnerable and disadvantaged groups of people are trafficked for 
purposes of various unlawful activities.  
In the international scenario, if any person moves from one country to 
another country in search work or any other avocation, can be described as migrant 
worker. Such migrant workers shall not be nationals of the country wherein they 
work. Many a times, due to lack of nationality these migrant workers rights are 
affected compare to that of the nationals of the country wherein they reside. In order 
to protect the rights of such workers and their families to eliminate any 
discrimination, the United Nations adopted an international convention in 1990 
referred to as ‘International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All 
Migrant Workers and Members of Their families.’ This Convention came into effect 
in 2003.  
According to the Convention, a migrant worker means “a person who is 
engaged or has been engaged in a remunerated activity in a State of which he or she is 
not a national.” 
Apart from the UN, the International Labour Organisation adopted a 
Migration for Employment Convention in 1949, Migrant workers (Supplementary 
Provisions) Convention in 1975. According to the UN estimates, the population of 
migrant workers in the world constitutes about 3% of the world population. Migrant 
workers constitute of two types. 
Due to abject poverty, famines, floods, natural disasters, urbanization, lack of 
sustainable irrigational facilities, etc., people who move in search of better living 
from their place of origin to another place or city in the same country are generally 
referred to as National Migrant workers. These people being citizens may have all 
the fundamental rights guaranteed by the constitution. However, due to certain legal 
technicalities, they may face certain adverse effects in the free exercise of their rights 
legally guaranteed. Taking the barricades that are faced by these workers into 
National Migrant Workers : 
18
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
consideration, the National and State Human Rights Commissions, and the 
governments of the Union and the State adopt a number of policy measures to protect 
the rights of these migrant workers.    
Disability assumes different meaning in different contexts. However, 
according to UN Declaration on the Rights of Disabled Persons (1975) “any 
person unable to ensure by 
himself or herself, wholly or 
partly the necessities of a 
normal individual and or 
social life as a result of a 
deficiency either congenital 
or not in his /her physical or 
mental abilities” could be 
described as disabled. 
Accordingly, any 
individual may also qualify as disabled if he/she has had impairment in the past or is 
seen as disabled based on a personal or group standard, or norm. Such impairments 
may include physical, sensory, and cognitive or developmental disabilities. People 
who suffer from mental disorders such as, psychiatric or psychological infirmities 
are also described as disabled persons. The United Nations considering the 
increasing number of disabled people, and to augment their rights adopted a 
convention in 2006. It has also 
established an organ called as 
UN Enable, which takes care 
of the interests of these people. 
In the Millennium goals, the 
UN adopted a specific goal to 
protect the rights of the 
Disabled.
In the National sphere 
to uphold the dignity and 
freedom of the disabled the 
Union and the States adopted a 
Disabled Persons : 
19
number of legislative and policy formulations. To protect their dignity and to remove 
the stigma of disabled from the minds of these people, the Union and State 
Governments took a number of steps including extending 3% reservation in 
education and jobs. Further, the Government to provide a social status to these people 
named them as differently abled people. 
People those who are of 60 years and above in age are normally described as 
old age people or elderly persons. Very often, the rights of these people are violated 
by family members, society and in other fronts. Being elders, their rights need to be 
protected. In order to protect their rights, the UN adopted a number of resolutions and 
declared every October 1 to be celebrated as the International aged people’s day. 
It conducted a world congress in 2002 at Madrid and plan to adopt a 
convention to protect the rights of the aged people. As per the official agency of 
social policy and development division of the UN there are 737 million aged people 
living in the world today.
Elderly Persons : 
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
20
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
By 2050, it may cross 2 billion, which may outnumber the children of the 
world aged below 14 years. It is important to protect their rights considering their 
contributions to each society during their young and Middle Ages. 
In the national scenario, the Government of India adopted a national policy of 
older persons in 1998. In view of the increasing number of older persons and to 
protect their rights, the Government of India enacted the Maintenance and Welfare 
of Parents and Senior Citizens  Act 2007, in order to extend legal protection to the 
rights of the elderly persons in the country. It has also constituted a National Council 
for elderly persons to address various aspects concerning the rights of elderly 
persons.
The people those who are afflicted by this most dreaded disease are another 
kind of persons who are discriminated on many counts in enjoying their basic rights 
around the World. According to UN official agency UNAIDS there are about 34 
million people living in the World affected by HIV/AIDS. The UN works and adopts 
different strategies through its various organs and with the nation-states to augment 
the rights of these people who are many times, denied human treatment by fellow 
citizens, family members and even at hospitals.      
The term Gypsy is commonly used who are connected with the ethnic name 
of Roma. They are also called as Sinti in some parts. There are number of people 
residing in various parts of the world.  The people belonging to these tribes move 
frequently from one place to other either within the same country or region or in the 
other parts of the world. They live mostly in the Western and Latin American 
HIV Positive Persons/AIDS patients :
Roma/Gypsies/Sinti : 
21
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
22
countries.  The UN, to augment the human rights of 
these people, initiated a number of efforts. 
Due to the sexual orientation and other habits of these people, they are ill-
treated in many parts of the world. Even the UN could not take a rigid stand in the 
protection of human rights of these people due to opposition of  majority of its 
members. These people are often targeted by society for their sexual preference. 
However, some of the countries including UK have recently enacted legislations to 
protect the rights of these people. Among the various groups of sexual minorities, 
trans-gender face many problems in the society including their basic right to life and 
liberty. In India, these people are gradually acquiring few rights and receiving 
judicial recognition. 
All the groups stated above are of a general classification. However, it may 
vary from country to country and different classification is evolved many a times, 
which may not have a standard international criterion to define vulnerable group.   In 
the Indian context, the following may be broadly classified as vulnerable groups of 
people based on socio-economic, cultural and other criteria. They are as follows: (1) 
women; (2) Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes; (3) Children; (4) Aged People; 
(5) Migrant workers; (6) Sex Workers (7) HIV /AIDS people;  (8) Sexual minorities.
Sexual Minorities: Lesbian / Gay and Trans - gender :
Equal Rights for Sexual Minorities
         Nature of Sexual Minorities

HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
23
3.  Customary, Social, Economic & Cultural Problems of the 
Vulnerable and Disadvantaged Groups
Since the practices on the above counts vary from society to society, the 
common issues concerning these groups of people and efforts of the international 
community are briefly discussed. The individual aspects relating to India are 
discussed in each sub-head independently.
From ancient to modern time’s vulnerable group of people are the main 
targets of the advantaged sections of the society. They are often harassed on grounds 
of customary, social practices and cultural factors. In a number of circumstances, 
they are denied life and liberty, to enjoy their human rights guaranteed by the 
international community. Among the various problems that afflict them is denial of 
land, property rights which deprives their social and cultural status in the society. 
Apart from the basic economic aspect of poverty, customs and traditions practices in 
each society also keep them away from the main stream activities of the society. 
Accordingly, to the philosophy of human rights, it is incorrect to deny the 
rights of any person or sections of society. Since every individual possess human 
rights to exercise the rights on an equal basis, abrogation of their rights on customary, 
social, economic, and cultural perspective only negates the development of a society. 
Thus for example, debts incurred by poor people, depriving their economic earning 
capacity, or caught up in customary, social perspectives such as untouchability, sex 
trade, slavery, deprivation of food, lack of access to education, basic medical and 
health facilities all constitute as denial of rights. Hence, human rights, being 
inseparable rights, they could not be sold, pledged, forfeited, or denied for any 
reason. 
All the documents of human rights are committed for the promotion of 
human rights of all, including the vulnerable groups. In order to promote and protect 
the rights of these people, the international community has adopted a number of 
special documents. Many of the problems are mostly common to vulnerable groups. 
They are poverty, lack of access to nutritional food, sufficient clothing, adequate 
shelter, education, health facilities, social security, access to law and justice system, 
participation in the governance, et.al. In spite of adoption of legal instruments and 
policy formulations both at the international and national sphere, specific to promote 
the rights of these groups, the socio-economic, cultural aspects prevailing in each 
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
society, hamper the rights of these people to a great extent.
In order to enable the disadvantaged sections of people, the United Nations 
appointed a number of committees and commissions to deal with the issues specific 
to each vulnerable group. Based on the reports of the various committees, the UN has 
adopted a general framework to eradicate and to address the adverse situations faced 
by these groups. The suggestions include:
nEqual pay for equal work; 
nIndependent mechanism or commission to establish and to deal with each 
category of people; 
nBasic compulsory  education; 
nSpecial concessions to these people; 
nProvisions to enable them to take part in the governance; 
nIndependent forums to express their grievances; 
nEasy accessibility to medical and health care; and, 
nEfforts to raise the standard of living, subsidized food supply, eradicate 
malnutrition, abolish any customary practices that threaten their survival, 
over all social security etc.   
In 2008 the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in order to 
cover more groups of people and to extend the purview of the problems afflicted to 
them   has  introduced  the terminology marginalized and disadvantaged groups  
instead of Vulnerable groups. Nevertheless, the term ‘vulnerable’ also employed, as 
it is an established concept of international law, and many a times preferred by the 
nation-states for obvious reasons. The 2008 guidelines appealed to the states to 
provide specific data on the efforts of the states in raising the standards of these 
groups to enhance their rights. The guidelines include the training programmes, 
specific data on housing, right to food, education, scientific progression, mal-
nutrition, health, and other social welfare schemes evolved from time to time by the 
states.
24
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
Based on the guidelines, each state was asked to submit independent reports 
for the scrutiny of the United Nations. In this regard, the Government of India, 
submitted its report in 2008 and 2012, which clearly stated in detail the constitutional 
policy, the schemes adopted by the Union and states with respect to each group of the 
people of vulnerable or disadvantaged sections. The detailed programme list 
submitted by India was commended by many states for the steps taken by the country 
especially to uplift the rights of women, children, SC/ST’s, backward class people, 
older persons, and disabled. A number of suggestions were rendered at the same time, 
to overcome the age-old practices that are still adopted against these people 
especially, women, SC/STs, minorities, and other backward classes in various parts 
of the country.
Though the UN is making the best efforts to eradicate the problems 
encountered by many of the disadvantaged people in the world, still resistance by 
many advanced countries to provide data and to initiate steps  to eliminate the owes 
of disadvantaged people is far from satisfactory. The dissemination of the objectives 
of human rights through education in large scale is the only way out, as highlighted 
by the UN, in its various policy formulations and legal documents, to promote and 
protect the rights of these groups. In February 2012, the General Assembly of the 
United Nations through Resolution 66/137 reaffirmed that it is the duty of every 
individual and organ of the society to strive to teach and promote education to foster 
respect for Human Rights. It has adopted a Plan of Action for the impartation of 
human rights education entitled as World Programme For Human Rights Education.  
It is the hope of the World body that such  dissemination in turn will certainly equip 
the people, especially the marginalized groups, to know their rights, in order to attain 
just and favourable conditions for the augmentation of their rights as enshrined by 
the documents of international law of human rights.  
25
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
      UNIT-I MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS                                                         Answers
1.   On which of the grounds / aspects discrimination is based on?
A. Gender, disability, social, cultural, customary type, etc.
B. Race, sex, caste, colure of skin, etc.
C. Both'A'and'B' D. None of the above.
2.   Which international convention under Article 1 A gives definition of Refugees?   
A. Universal Declaration of Human Rights
B. International covenant on civil and political rights.
C. Convention on rights of Refugees
D. United Nations Convention on the Refugees-1951.
3.   Stateless means:
A. Group of persons in a state who are less in numbers.
B.  Any person or group of persons who do not possess the nationality of any state.
C. Persons who have less number of nationalities.
D. Group of persons who lives in less part of the territory of any state.
4.   Which of the following convention speaks about the rights and 
       provisions relating to Migrant workers?
A. International convention on the protection of the rights of all migrant workers and
members of their families.
B. Migration for Employment convention-1949 (ILO)
C. Migrant workers (supplementary provisions) convention in 1975. D. 
All of the above.
5.    What is the age normally considered as an 'Elderly person'?
A. 40 years and above
B.  25 years and above
C.  18 years and above
D. 60 years and above.
6.   United Nations adopted many resolutions and declared every year.......to be
celebrated as the International Aged People's Day.
A. 1st September:
B. 1st November
C. 1st October
D. 5th September.
7.   To protect the rights of the elderly people Government of India enacted ....... .act.  
A. The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act 2007.
B. Indian governments Senior Citizens Act.
C. Welfare of elderly people's Act.
D. Welfare of Senior Citizens Act.
8.   To eradicate and address the adverse situations faced by disadvantaged groups 
of people, United Nations adopted a general frame work and given suggestions, 
these suggestions include....................
A. Equal pay for equal work
B.  Independent mechanism or commission to establish and to deal with 
     each category of people; 
C.  Basic compulsory education.
D. All of the above
( A)
(D )
(B)
(D)
( D)
(C)
(A)
(D)
26
This Unit will introduce the two categories of disadvantaged groups of 
People, viz., women, and children. In this Unit the general issues and problems 
relating to Women and Children will be discussed. This unit will also introduce in 
brief the international scenario of the development of rights of women and children 
and discuss the national perspectives.
A) Human Rights of Women
1. HUMAN RIGHTS AND WOMEN’S RIGHTS 
2. INTERNATIONAL SCENARIO
Women constitute almost half of the world population. However, their 
enjoyment of rights equally with that of men is far from satisfactory. In every society 
from ancient to modern times, women are considered as the property of men to serve 
their interests in both society and domestic front. In order to halt such practices, the 
UN and the international community have evolved a number of methods to augment 
the rights of women on par with men without any kind of discrimination. The efforts 
of the international community and the government of India are discussed in two 
separate heads in brief.   
In the beginning, international politics and law discriminated women and 
avoided equal status to women on par with men. However, after the Second World 
War with the raising voice of women the situation changed considerably.  During the 
drafting stages of the Charter of the United Nations, the protest voices of women 
were answered. Accordingly, the 
preamble of the Charter of the United 
Nations unequivocally declared that 
the human rights of the people of the 
world be enjoyed by all without any 
kind of discrimination towards 
women. 
The international community 
reiterating its commitment to 
promote the human rights of women 
Unit-IIStatus Of Women And Children In 
International And National Perspectives
27
appointed Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt, the former first lady of America as the 
chairperson of the drafting committee of the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights. The former President of USA,  Henry Truman appreciating her efforts 
termed her as the First Lady of the World who championed noble cause of promoting 
human rights of the people of the World. The efforts of Mrs. Roosevelt considerably 
changed the face of international politics and opened the gates for the adoption of a 
number of legal documents avoiding discrimination against women. A series of 
special instruments have been adopted for the protection of women’s rights to 
eliminate gender-based discrimination in the world.   
It clearly advocated that all the rights enshrined in the declaration are to be 
enjoyed by all without any discrimination towards sex. The same was reiterated in 
the Covenants on Civil and Political Rights, and Economic, Social and Cultural 
rights adopted in 1966.
Apart from the general provisions to guarantee the human rights of women, 
the UN from 1952, adopted a number of conventions and declarations to promote 
status of women in all respects.  In the series of documents that were adopted 
specially dealing with women, the important ones are-
The Convention on the 
Political Rights of Women, 
1952 
The Declaration on the 
Protection of Women and 
Children in Emergency and 
Armed Conflict 1974
In spite of the efforts of the 
world community to promote the 
human rights of women, the 
traditional aspects that are adopted 
in various parts of the world could 
not bloom the rights of women as 
advocated by International Law of 
Human Rights. The ideological 

?
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
28
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
conflicts in the promotion of human rights between the east, west, and socialist 
blocks further relegated the position of women to a secondary level. Apart from the 
above, the domination of western concept of promoting civil and political rights with 
a market-oriented economy in the public field has completely sidelined the rights of 
women. 
 The UN considering the situation determined to speed up its efforts to make 
the private and public aspects of women across the world, started conducting special 
conferences to deal exclusively with the women’s issues  opening with the first world 
women’s conference in 1975 at Mexico. Based on the representation and voices 
raised by women from various geographical, cultural, racial, religious backgrounds, 
the UN declared the period 1976-85, as the decade of women. During this period, a 
number of conferences were conducted to assess the status of women and to evolve 
specific strategies in order to wipe out the discriminatory practices followed around 
the world.
During this period, a number of committees were constituted to evolve 
specific strategies.  Based on the feedback, the UN in 1979 adopted The Convention 
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (popularly 
referred to as CEDAW Convention). This convention became a milestone in the 
development of women’s rights and addressed to eliminate all kinds of 
discrimination. The convention has come into force in 1981 and 187 states have 
ratified the convention and became parties. Among the few who have not become 
parties to it are Iran, Palau, Somalia, Sudan, South Sudan, Tonga, and United States 
of America. USA and Palau have signed but not ratified the convention.
The convention has a preamble and 30 articles. It defines acts that constitute 
as discrimination and specifies the strategies to the national governments to adopt 
policies to eliminate such discrimination against women.      
According to the Convention, discrimination against women as "...any 
distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex which has the effect or 
purpose of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise by women, 
irrespective of their marital status, on a basis of equality of men and women, of 
human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, 
civil or any other field." (Article 1)
29
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
By accepting the Convention, States commit themselves to undertake a series 
of measures to end discrimination against women in all forms, including: (Article 2)
 It sets out equal rights for women, regardless of their marital status, in all 
fields - political, economic, social, cultural and civil - and calls for national 
legislation banning discrimination. (Article 3)
These principles have been further enunciated in detail in the Convention. 
The convention for the first time guaranteed the health rights of women, including 
that of reporductive health and choice.
As per the provisions of the Convention, each country need to submit 
independent reports to the committees appointed by the UN at periodical intervals on 
the steps taken by them in the promotion of women’s rights. In this context, it is to be 
noted that the effectiveness of the Convention in promoting the rights of women is 
significantly undermined by the states by making reservations to several provisions 
of the convention. 
The UN, in order to monitor the situation in the promotion of women’s rights 
adopted an optional Protocol to the CEDAW Convention in 1999, which came 
into force in 2000. According to the protocol, the UN established a Committee to 
receive complaints from women for any alleged violation of their rights in the 
national scenario. However, only women belonging to states, which are parties to the 
protocol, could make complaints to UN monitoring committee. The Protocol also 
establishes a distinctive feature: an inquiry procedure that allows the Committee to 
to incorporate the principle of equality of men and women in their legal system, 
abolish all discriminatory laws and adopt appropriate ones prohibiting 
discrimination against women; 
to establish tribunals and other public institutions to ensure the effective 
protection of women against discrimination; and
to ensure elimination of all acts of discrimination against women by persons, 
organizations or enterprise
3.  SUPERVISION
30
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
31
initiate investigations into suspected grave or systematic violations by a state party 
against women. In this regard the Committee can carry out visits to the country in 
question. 
The Committee has contributed significantly to the interpretation of the 
obligations imposed by the Convention through its General Recommendations. 
They have dealt with several issues of utmost importance for women, such as 
violence against women; equal remuneration for work of equal value; female 
circumcision; abuses against HIV/AIDS patients ; violence against women; equality 
in marriage and family relations; women’s political rights, women and health; 
temporary special measures; and women migrant workers .
Apart from the above legal instruments, the UN had conducted the following 
Conferences to make further recommendations to nation-states to address the 
significant issues relating to women.
The First World Conferecne was conducted during 19 June- 2 July ,1975 at 
Mexico. In this conference it set three objectives ;  
nFull gender equality and the elimination of gender 
discrimination; 
nThe integration and full participation of women in 
development; 
nAn increased contribution by women towards 
strengthening world peace. 
Second World Conference on Women at 
Copenhagen, 14-30 July 1980
This Conference recognized that there was a 
disparity between women's guaranteed rights and 
their capacity to exercise them. Participants identified 
three spheres in which measures for equality, 
4.  WORLD CONFERENCES ON WOMEN

HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
development and peace were needed: 
n Equal access to education; 
n Equal access to employment opportunities; 
nEqual access to adequate health care services
The data presented 
by the United Nations to the 
delegations of Member 
States revealed that the 
improvements observed 
had benefited only a limited 
number of women. Thus, 
the Nairobi Conference was 
mandated to seek new ways 
of overcoming obstacles for 
achieving the objectives of 
the Decade i.e., equality, 
development, and peace. 
The Nairobi Conference 
recognized that gender equality was not an isolated issue, but encompassed all areas 
of human activity. 
The Beijing World Conference was 
conducted to oversee the implementation 
of the agenda adopted in the third 
conference. About 189 countries took 
part in this conference. This was the 
biggest ever conference in the history of 
women’s congress. The significant factor 
is that this conference mainly discussed 
the various forms of violence that are 
Third World Conference on Women Nairobi, 15-26 June 1985 
Fourth World Conference on Women Beijing, 4-15 September 1995
32
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
taking place in the world against women, including domestic violence. After 
extensive deliberations, twelve critical areas were identified with a Plan of Action to 
be implemented by states parties both internationally and nationally.  The identified 
areas are: 
Women And Poverty :
Education And Training Of Women :
Women And Health :
33
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
Violence Against Women :
Women And Armed Conflict :
Women And The Economy :
34
Women In Power And Decision-Making :
Institutional Mechanism For The Advancement Of Women :
Human Rights of Women :
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
35
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
36
Women And The Environment :
Women And The Media :
The Girl Child :

HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
37
The conference also identified and recognized the significance of Non-
Governmental organizations role in promoting the rights of women.
Apart from these World Conferences, the UN in order to monitor the situation 
based on the reports submitted by the Women’s Commission in 2010, It established 
UN WOMEN; a separate organisation to work and monitor the women’s issues on a 
ntinues basis. 
The main functions of the UN WOMEN are:
lTo support  inter-governmental bodies, such as the Commission on the Status 
of Women, in their formulation of policies, global standards and norms.
lTo help Member States, to implement these standards, to provide suitable 
technical, financial support to those countries that request it, and to forge effective 
partnerships with civil society.
lTo hold the UN system accountable for its own commitments on gender 
equality, including regular monitoring of states.
Apart from these activities, the Security Council for the first time adopted a 
resolution in 2000. 
The resolution reaffirms the important role of women in the prevention and 
resolution of conflicts, peace negotiations, peace-building, peacekeeping, 
humanitarian response and in post-conflict reconstruction and stresses the 
importance of their equal participation and full involvement in all efforts for the 
maintenance and promotion of peace and security. 
 The   also highlight the significance of 
the promotion of women’s rights. Accordingly, the promotion of Gender Equality; as 
one of its main goals apart from the others which also deal with the issues of women 
indirectly such as maternal health; combat HIV/AIDS and also global partnerships to 
develop strategies to eradicate discrimination against women. The Rome Statute of 
International Criminal Court also has provisions for the protection of crimes 
committed against women. There are efforts are taking place to request the General 
Assembly to conduct a fifth World Conference in 2015 to address and review the 
UN Millennium development goals
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality
and the Empowerment of Women
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
efforts and action plans adopted on various issues of women.
For the first time in history, the Government of USA on February 28, 1909 after 
adoption of socialist declaration to highlight the issues of women, celebrated this day 
as women’s day.  After the declaration of USA, a 
number of countries in the Western World declared 
different dates to celebrate the Women’s day. 
Finally, in the year 1977, the General Assembly of 
the UN declared March 8 as International 
Women’s and Peace Day. Following the 
Declaration today all most all the countries 
celebrate March 8 as the Women’s day in 
recognition of their services and for the promotion 
of their rights. In many countries, this day is declared as a holiday to celebrate the 
women’s achievements in their country. In some countries it is declared as holiday 
for women employees and workers.
In 1999, the General Assembly designated November 25 every year to be 
celebrated as the International Day for the elimination of Violence against 
Women. The UN accordingly requested the member states and the Non-
Governmental Organisations in the world to work on that day to raise awareness 
campaigns to end violence against women.
The customary practices such as sati, purdah and devadasi system robbed the 
freedom of women to a great extent and deprived of their political, social and 
economic rights especially in inheritance of property. The Hindu law completely 
prohibited the property rights of inheritance until recent times. During the British 
Period, a number of reformers, Raja Ramohan Ray, Iswarchandra Vidayasagar, 
Knadukuriveerasalingam, Jyothirao Phule, Balaganadara Tilak and many other 
reformers fought for the abolition of unequal treatment meted out to women in many 
fronts.  
After independence, the Constitution of India adopted on January 26, 1950 
abolished all kinds of discriminatory practices against women.  The constitution on 
5. INTERNATIONAL WOMEN’S DAY
6.  NATIONAL STANDARDS
38
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
the lines of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1948 recognizing the rights 
of women, has a number of provisions to protect in augmenting their rights. Some of 
the Salient Features are: 
vThe Constitution of India through Article 14 recognized equality and equal 
protection before law for both men and women.  
vNo discrimination against women is permissible. (Article 15 (1)).  
vEquality of opportunity in matters of public appointments for all citizens is 
guaranteed and in particular gender-based discrimination in respect of 
employment or office under the state has been prohibited. (Art. 16).  
vThrough Article 15 clause (3) it permits the state to make any special law or 
provisions or concession to be extended for the promotion and welfare of Women. 
vArticle 21 guarantees the Life and Liberty to all the citizens without any sort 
discrimination. 
vThe Directive Principles of States Policy (which in the language of human 
rights described as Economic, Social and Cultural Rights) directs the State to 
make provisions through Article 39 (a) the state to ensure both men and women 
have the right to an adequate means of livelihood. 
vArticle 39 (Clause D) Provide for  equal pay for equal work without any kind 
discrimination.
vArticle 42 allows the state to make provisions for securing just and human 
conditions of work and maternity relief. 
vAccording to Article 51( A ) (e)  it is the fundamental duty of every citizen to 
renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women 
To achieve the objectives of the constitution and to discharge its international 
obligations to uplift the rights of women, the Government of India enacted a number 
of special legislations and amended some of the existing civil, criminal, and family 
laws.
They are:
 that prohibits demand of dowry by the in laws in 
any form linked with the marriage of women, and  if proved it constitutes as a   crime 
under the eye of law. 
as amended in 1956 prohibits any marriage of a 
girl below the age of 18 years. In case if marriage is performed below the age 18, 
The Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961
Child Marriage Restraint Act 1929 
39
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
constitutes as a crime where in the elders and the husband together are punishable. 
This Act increased the age limit of a female from 15 to 18 years and that of a male 
from 18 to 21 years. 
 as amended in 1976 provides equal right of 
inheritance of property for women as a coparcener in the joint property of a family. 
This Act further provides the rights to a girl to repudiate any child marriage 
performed before attaining majority.
 (which repealed the Suppression of 
Immoral Traffic Act of 1956), prohibits of selling, soliciting women or girls for any 
immoral purpose including keeping them as brothels. The aim of the Act is to 
prohibit sexual exploitation of person, which includes men and children. It 
decriminalizes prostitution.  
This act punishes the 
exploitation of women or depiction of women in any indecent manner that affects the 
dignity of women. It makes such acts as a criminal offence. 
 This act prohibits any kind of act 
forcing a woman to immolate along with the dead body of the husband. This is again 
a criminal offence where in the punishment may be awarded up to life imprisonment.
This Act was enacted to establish a 
National Commission of women to monitor and to help women related issues, 
especially to review the Constitutional and Legal safeguards for women; to 
recommend remedial legislative measures ;  to facilitate redressal of grievances and  
to advise the Government on all policy matters affecting women.
This Act prohibits scanning of a foetus and performing illegal abortions to kill 
a female foetus. 
This Act was amended 
to discharge the international commitments of the Government of India to the 
CEDAW Convention. According to this Act, any type of intimidation of women or 
harassment by family or otherwise, which constitutes a violation to the dignity of 
women, is punishable and is a criminal offence.
The Marriage Amendment Act 2001, amended the Hindu Marriage Act, Special 
The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act 1986
Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act 1986: 
Commission of Sati (prevention) Act 1987:
National Commission of Women Act 1990: 
Prenatal Diagnostic Technique ( Regulation and Prevention of Misuse ) Act 
1994: 
Protection of Women from Domestic Violation Act 2005: 
40
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
Marriage Act, Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, the Code of Criminal Procedure 
providing for speedy disposal of applications for maintenance. This Act further 
removed the ceiling of maintenance and gave an ample discretion to judiciary to 
decide the amount of maintenance in each case depending on the status of other 
spouse.
In spite of progressive legislations and judicial pronouncements, the misuse 
of technology, rapid urbanization, poverty, natural calamities such as famines, floods 
etc., many a times worsens the situation of women in exercising their rights to the 
fullest extent as guaranteed by law. Indian women suffer a number of inequalities 
especially in the domestic front on the name of customary and religious faiths. This is 
more evident especially in issues relating to marriage, customary ceremonial 
functions, choice of reproductive rights, payment of wages, especially in the 
agricultural and other sectors, inheritance of property, domestic violence, custodial 
rapes, sexual harassment at work place and in society.  
Apart from the above legislations, the government of India established the 
National Commission of Women to cater to the needs of women in a number of areas. 
The Indian Judiciary in a number of judgments has greatly contributed for the 
augmentation of women’s rights in a wide array of areas such as: 
lDiscretion  shown  in the area of employment; 
lUnequal treatment to HIV Victims and AIDS patients; 
lInheritance in the property  laws; 
lTreatment of victims of rape, sexual harassment of women at work place, dowry 
related offences; 
lSeparate police cells to women prisoners; establishment  of women police 
stations, Safety of women in the police lock-ups; 
lBan on use of the latest technology, which include Ericsson method, sonography 
an amniocentesis  tests;  Advertisements, Serials, in the print and electronic 
Media with respect to the pre-natal diagnostic techniques; 
lBanning of discriminatory cosmetic advertisements, banning even indecent 
representation of women in films, upholding dignity of prostitutes in cases of 
rape; Reproductive rights, etc., certainly augmented the rights of women 
compared to yester years. Many of the judgments of the courts led the legislature 
to enact a number of progressive laws or to amend the existing ones.  
41
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
7. National Policy of Women
8. Sum up
 The Government of India in the year 2001 adopted a National Policy of Women for 
advancement, development and empowerment of women. The Ministry of Women 
and child development takes care of various aspects of women’s development and 
empowerment. The aims and objectives of the policy are looked after by the Ministry 
to achieve self sufficiency of Indian women. The aims and objectives of the policy 
are: 
(i) Creating an environment through positive economic and social policies for full 
development of women to enable them to realize their full potential.
(ii) The de-jure and de-facto enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental 
freedom by women on equal basis with men in all spheres – political, 
economic, social, cultural and civil.
(iii) Equal access to participation and decision making of women in social, 
political, and economic life of the nation.
(iv) Equal access to women to healthcare, qualityeducation at all levels, career and 
vocational guidance, employment, equal remuneration, occupational health 
and safety, social security and public office etc.
(v) Strengthening legal systems aimed at elimination of all forms of 
discriminationagainst women.
(vi) Changing societal attitudes and community practices by active participation 
and involvement of both men and women.
(vii) Mainstreaming a gender perspective in the development process.
(viii) Elimination of discrimination and all forms of violence against women and the 
girl child; and 
(ix) Building and strengthening partnerships with civil society, particularly 
women’s organizations. 
Apart from National Policies and other initiatives, the Government of India 
and the State Governments has evolved a number of policy formulations, schemes 
through annual budgets for the promotion of women’s rights.
The brief over view of the plight of women both internationally and nationally 
brings the scenario to the fore, which men need to consider women as partners in 
progress. In a  traditional society like India, where many women goddess are 
worshipped with lot of devotion and respect, when it comes to equal treatment of 
42
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
their biological partners, both men and society keep them in low profile. Many a 
times they are considered as servants of the home, and are looked at as sexual objects. 
Their economic capacity is deprived to make them dependent on the male dominated 
society. The traditional, economic, social and cultural disbeliefs and age old 
customary practices of intimidating cruel practices that are prevalent in many parts 
of the world has to be halted with welcome sign of considering them as partners in 
progress. Love, affection, care with utmost respect for the augmentation of their 
rights alone would result in uplifting their rights and strengthen the international and 
national efforts in realizing their rights as human beings.
43
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
Among the various vulnerable groups, children are another major category, 
whose rights are affected by negligence and other conditions in every society. In 
many societies in the world, especially in the developing world from tender age, their 
rights are abused for a variety of reasons.  A child has a number of basic rights, such 
as, protection and prevention of illegal abortion, right to nourishment, adequate 
nutritious  food, basic health care, love and affection of family, society, not to abuse 
the tender age, recreation, right to basic  education,  right to development, right to 
identity, community and social life, etc.  
Poverty is a negation to the rights of millions of children in many societies 
around the world. Most often, they are pushed to work from the tender age at the cost 
of their physical, intellectual, and psychological development. According to the 
United Nations Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF) around ten million 
children every year  below the age of  five  die due to lack of proper  medical care. 
About 100 million children mostly girls are not in  schools. In the developing world, 
about 150 million children are underweight due to lack of nutritious food. Therefore, 
it is the duty of  family, society and the nation- states to render their  assistance to 
augment the rights of children in every sphere
 Realizing the  traumatic sufferance of children in the First World War, 
Eglantyne Jebb a British lady with the help of her sister Dorothy Boxton in 1919 
founded the save children organization in London.  
1. Child Rights : Efforts of the International community
(B) Human Rights and Children
EglantyneJebb, 1876-1928, Founder of Save the Children and champion of children's rights
44
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
Eglantyne Jebb, 1876-1928, Founder of Save the Children and champion of 
children’s rights
 In 1920 with the help of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), 
it became an international organization for save the children, which was later named 
as the International Union for Save the Children. In 1923, she drafted a first draft of 
children rights. In 1924, she sent the document to the League of Nations.  Basing on 
this document on October 26, 1924 the League of Nations adopted a declaration 
popularly termed as the Geneva Declaration on the Rights of Child. The 
Declaration was again placed before the General Council of the League of Nations in 
1934, which was accepted by majority of nations of the League. The Declaration has 
five articles, which speaks of the responsibility of men and women of the world to 
protect children than on conferring rights on the children.
After the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948, it 
has explicitly recognized the rights of every person including the children. The 
Declaration clearly described, “…. motherhood and childhood are entitled to special 
care and assistance” and describes the family as “the natural and fundamental group 
unit of society.”  
In order to augment the rights of children as advocated in the Universal 
Declaration, the General Assembly in 1959 adopted the first declaration dealing with 
the rights of child. The Declaration lays down ten principles, which highlight the 
significance of children’s rights for special care and protection before and after birth 
and appropriate legal enactments by the nation-states. 
The ten principles are as follows:
The right to equality without any distinction on account of race, religion, or 
national origin.
The right to special protection for the child’s physical, mental, and social 
development.
The right to a name and a nationality.
The right to adequate nutrition, housing and medical services.
The right to special education and treatment when a child is physically or 
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
45
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
mentally  handicapped.
The right to understanding and love by parents and society.
The right to recreational activities and free education.
The right to be among the first to receive relief in all circumstances.
The right to protection against all forms of neglect, cruelty and exploitation.
The right to be brought up in a spirit of understanding, tolerance, friendship 
among peoples, and universal brotherhood.
After the adoption of the Declaration, the 
United Nations in 1966 adopted two more important 
Covenants on Human Rights. They are International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, ( ICCPR) and 
International Covenant on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights (ICESCR). Both the Covenants 
recognizes civil, political, economic, social, and 
cultural rights  of every person in the world including 
the children. 
In 1976 UN constituted the Human Rights 
Committee (which is now named as the Human Rights Council)  has been entrusted 
to oversee the functioning and the implementation of the covenants along with the 
child rights.
In 1973, the International 
Labour organization (ILO) adopted 
The Minimum Age Convention 
(Convention No. 138).  The 
Convention came into force in 1976. 
Parties to the convention have to 
obey and observe the conditions set 
in the convention in terms of 
employment of children. According 
to the Convention, no child below 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10.
46
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
the age of 15 years can be engaged in work. However, in exceptional circumstances, 
children below 15 and above 13 may be engaged in light work, which in no way is 
harmful to the child.  States parties who have ratified the convention need to observe 
the conditions stated there in without any deviation. 153 member states have so far 
ratified the convention, and observe it with strict adherence. It is unfortunate, that 
India, which has a huge number of children, has not yet ratified the Convention.
The United Nations considering the 
number of abuses that are alarmingly 
raising all over the world  in the protection 
and promotion of children’s rights adopted 
a legally binding convention directly 
addressing the  children rights as human 
rights. 190 states become parties by 
ratifying the Convention. However, United States of America and Somalia have not 
yet ratified the convention. 
The objective behind the Convention is, children being human; their rights too 
constitute as human rights. As human rights, children rights legally guarantee their 
rights internationally and to halt all kinds of discriminatory abusive practices that are 
adopted against their life and liberty. Apart from the civil, political, economic, social, 
cultural rights, they have independent rights  to live with parents and to be taken care 
 2. Convention on the Rights of the Child 
(CRC) 1989
Child Delegates at the adoption 
of Child Rights Convention 
with the Secretary 
General Javier Perez De Cullear
47
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
48
during their childhood. Further, they guarantee the group rights, such as rights of 
refugees, minority children, and as disabled. 
The Convention is the first legally binding comprehensive document 
addressing all the rights of children, imposing binding obligations on the States to 
adopt and implement the Provisions of it. The fifty-four articles of the convention 
apart from guaranteeing all the rights of children also provided for the establishment 
of an International Commission on Child Rights to monitor and to seek reports from 
the states parties on the various aspects of the implementation of the provisions of it.
According to the article 1 of Convention, child means every human person 
below the age of 18 years is regarded as a child, unless otherwise by law a state 
reduces the age of a child from 18. Though this provision gave liberty to states to 
lower the age of majority, no state could reduce the age less than 16 years as a general 
norm. The liberty in the definition led many countries to describe the age of a child 
ranging between 16 to 18 years on different counts as the age of majority. 
Apart from defining the concept of child, the Convention highlights four 
important major principles.
 This provision makes a binding obligation on the states 
not to discriminate a child under any circumstances. 
 The Convention imposes an obligation on the 
States parties to take steps that any law that is in vogue or enacted in future, 
including societal conditions, practices in no way effect the best interests of 
children. 
 It is the duty of the states to take 
care of the development of child, which includes physical, mental, emotional, 
cognitive, social, and cultural developments in no way harmful to the life and 
survival of the child.
 Children should be freely allowed to express 
their opinions. The views expressed by them considering their age, mental 
maturity need to be respected,  encouraged, while giving due weight-age taking 
into consideration of  interest  and   welfare of  child. 
n
nBest Interests of the Child :
nRight to life, survival, and development :
nRespect to the Views of Child :
Non-discrimination :
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
The Rights stated in the Convention can be classified under eight major heads, which 
are as follows:
Right to Life and Liberty
Right to Education
Right to Food 
49
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
Right to Health
Right to Decent And Safe Environment 
Including Drinking Water
Right to Identity
50
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
The Protocols were adopted in the year 2000 and came into existence in 2002. 
India is a party to both the Protocols.
The  is on the Involvement of Children in Armed 
Conflict, which prohibits the recruitment, or involvement of children below the age 
of eighteen years. The states parties to the Protocol have a responsibility to prevent 
such activities.
The  is on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution, 
and Child Pornography.
First Optional Protocol
 Second Optional Protocol
Right to Fundamental Freedoms
Right to Protection
51
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
This protocol imposes obligations on the States parties to take steps to prevent 
the following :
It abolishes any act of Sale of Children, Child Prostitution, and Child 
Pornography. 
It has specified a number of uniform standards need to be adopted by the States 
in their national legislations with respect to offenders, protection of victims and 
remedial measures.
It provides a framework for International cooperation in these areas, especially 
for the prosecution of offenders.
Apart from the activities of the General Assembly, the Security Council, and 
other organs of the UN, the UNECSO, Human Rights Council, Office of the High 
Commissioner for Human Rights and UNICEF looks after the interest of children 
and their rights. Among all UNICEF is directly concerned with the rights of children, 
which reviews the situation in each region of the world, prepares the drafts, reports, 
and submit, to the General Assembly for adoption of legal texts and documents.  
The General Assembly of the United Nations created United Nations 
International Children’s Emergency Fund in 1953 to take care of children in Asia and 
Europe after the ravages of World War II. Initially it 
focused its attention with respect to food, shelter, and 
medical aid to children. With the increasing infant 
mortality, which is so high especially in Asia and 
Africa, it turned its attention towards health issues of 
children and mothers. Later, it started working with 
various other international organs like, World Health 
Organisation, Food and Agricultural Organisation 
(FAO), UNESCO and the Human Rights 
Commission. These activities resulted in to focus its 
activities from health to other areas of children rights, 
especially education. The extraordinary work of the UNICEF was appreciated 
n
n
n
3. UN Organs concerned Directly with the Rights of Children
4.  Brief overview of UNICEF ( United Nations Children’s Fund) 
52
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
everywhere in the world and it received the Noble Peace Prize in 1965.
With the award, it started focusing on peace keeping and making in various 
regions to create conducive environment for the development of children. After the 
adoption of the Child Rights Convention, and the optional protocols, in the 
contemporary era, it became a vital organ to look after every area of children’s 
Rights. Today it has offices almost in every country in the World.  At present its focus 
areas are; (1) Child survival and Development; (2) Basic Education and gender 
equality; (3) Children HIV and AIDS; (4) Child protection; and (5) Policy and 
Advocacy partnerships.
In order to augment the rights of children throughout the World, the General 
Assembly in 1954, declared November 20 every year to be celebrated as the 
Children’s Day. On this day along with 
all the organs of UN and the World 
bodies, the UNICEF especially organizes 
number activities and works with the 
states, which have different dates 
throughout the year for the celebration of 
Children’s Day. India celebrates 
November 14 every year as National 
Children’s day.   Among all the countries 
in the world, the USA has not yet 
designated any day in the year as children’s day.      
 
India being the second largest populated country in the world has a huge 
contingency of children. The population of children in India is approximately thirty 
five million of the total population.
Poverty often cited as the most common ground for the violation of the rights of 
children in India. Apart from this, lack of quality education and discrimination 
especially towards the socially backward people of the country constitutes as a major 
threat to the life of children. Further, lack of proper administrative implementation of 
the various schemes, legislative and constitutional dictums constitute as a major 
5.  World Children’s Day
6.  National Scenario of Children and Legal Position
53
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
threat for the augmentation of the life and liberty of children as subjects of the 
society. 
The constitution of India bans every kind of discrimination of individuals, including 
children. 
The major provisions of rights that are relating to the rights of children are:
Article 14 recognizes the equal rights.  
It empowers the State to make special provisions for the development of 
women and children (Article 15 (3)
Article 15(4) authorizes the state to make special provisions for the 
advancement any social or backward people of India including the Scheduled 
Castes and Tribes
Article 17 prohibits untouchability in any manner.
Article 19 confers freedom of speech, expression, to reside any part of the 
country, and move freely.
Article 21 guarantees free life and liberty, and make it obligatory that free and 
compulsory education be provided to every child in the age group of six to 
fourteen years.  
Article 23 prohibits traffic in human beings and abolishes bonded labour.
Article 24 bans the employment or recruitment of children below 14 years in  
any factory or mine or heavy and harmful industries to the health and growth of 
children.     
Apart from these rights, it confers the remedial measures through judiciary for 
the violation of any of the rights conferred on its citizens through judicial 
intervention through Articles 32 and 226 of the constitution.
Furthermore, to augment rights of children, it directs the state to make necessary 
policy formulations and legal enactments, through the Directive Principles of State 
7.  Legal provisions governing the rights of Children
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
54
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS 
Policy.
The relevant provisions of Directive Principles of State Policy, which deal with 
children, are:
Article 39 clause (e) directs the state to evolve policy formulations not to 
abuse the tender age of children, and economic incapacity should not adversely 
result in their employment in any avocation, especially below the age of fourteen 
years in no circumstances.
Clause (f) of the above article imposes an obligation on the state to provide 
opportunities and facilities for children to develop in a healthy environment. It 
further directs the state that life, liberty, and childhood be protected from any kind 
of exploitation, which includes moral or material negligence.
Article 45 provides for care of early childhood, and compulsory education for 
all children until the child attains the age of six years.
Article 46 further directs the state to take special efforts to promote the rights 
and interests of children belonging to social, educationally backward classes. In 
no way their economic and social status, adversely affect their rights.
Article 47 imposes an obligation to raise the nutritional standards of living and 
provide easy public access to health facilities.
Article 51 (c) imposes a duty on the state to promote and respect international 
commitments and obligations. As signatory to number of conventions, covenants 
and other documents on international human rights law, it is the duty of the state to 
discharge its obligations in the promotion of children’s rights through national 
legal framework.
According to Article 51 (A) sub clause (k) imposes the fundamental duty on 
the parents or wards to provide education to their children between the age group 
of six to fourteen years compulsorily.
In order to achieve the constitutional mandate and the international 
obligations, the government has from 1950 till now, through various five years plans, 
adopted a number of policy formulations for the promotion of rights of children 
keeping the best interest of children. However, the government gave more attention 
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
55
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
to the rights of children in the third five-year plan during the period of 1961-1966. 
The third plan period for the first time recognized the international obligations. 
Accordingly, it recognized children’s special needs. It established a Social Security 
Department to give special attention to the rights of children with respect to their 
health and education. In 1965, it established a food and nutrition board to enhance the 
status of children with respect to education and nutrition. It also set up an education 
committee to offer free education   to every child below ten years to fulfill the 
constitutional mandate. It also established a department of social welfare, which later 
became an independent ministry of social welfare, which is  re-designated as 
Ministry of Empowerment. 
The fourth five-year plan focused on a development package of basic 
minimum services to children. This scheme was introduced mainly, to take care of 
the destitute and neglected children of the country. Accordingly, in 1974 a National 
Policy of children was framed with an aim to cater to the needs of children. The 
policy clearly addresses the following as the important duties of the Union and the 
states. They are as follows: 
Comprehensive health programmes
Provisions for increasing the nutritional services;
Free and compulsory education of children up to the age of fourteen years;
Provisions for non-formal education;
Promotion of Physical education and other recreational facilities; 
Cultural and scientific activities in schools and other social sectors;
Special assistance to children belongs to socially weaker sections;
Upliftment of children in distress;
Protection against neglect ,cruelty and exploitation of children;
Protection against Child Labour;
Provisions for children ailing with disabilities ; and
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
56
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
ØEncourage the services of society, and other voluntary organizations.
The fifth five-year plan constituted Children’s Board in 1974 under the chairmanship 
of the Prime Minster of India, and launched a number of out reaching programmes to 
promote the best interest of children. The sixth five-year plan too adopted number 
schemes for the promotion of the interest of children. Among the various schemes, 
the notable one is the National Child Health policy, which aimed at providing health 
facilities to children with much care and precision. The seventh Five-year plan 
established a Ministry of Child and Women Welfare, and enacted a number of 
legislations.    
Among the prominent legislations, the Juvenile Justice Act was amended in 1986, 
repealing the Children Act 1960 to protect child offenders from severe punishments 
and to reform their behavioural attitudes. It also declared a National Policy on Child 
Labour. In the eighth five-year plan, it adopted scheme for assistance to infants to 
promote in country adoptions for destitute children and created a special agency 
named as Central Adoption Resource Agency (CARA). The ninth and tenth five-year 
plans too adopted various schemes for the promotion and augmentation of the 
welfare of children and their rights. 
The eleventh and twelfth plan reviewing the situation and plight of the children 
in the country, framed a number of policy formulations. During these periods, it also 
established a National Commission for Children, increasing the budgetary allocation 
for compulsory education, an extensive amendment to the Juvenile Justice Act, 
Adoption of Right to Education Act, concessions to girl children on various fronts, 
free mid day meal scheme to children of poor families etc.
In spite of the laudable efforts of both the Union and States, even today millions 
of the Indian children die due to lack of nutritious food, lack of health care, and many 
other social, customary, economic, and cultural factors that hamper their growth. 
According to many reports of international agencies and non-governmental 
organizations, India is the major country compared to many of the under developed 
countries including the African region, where in the plight of children is worse in 
enjoying their rights as subjects of the State.    The main reason is the inefficiency of 
the administrative wings of the state to properly implement and monitor the situation, 
apart from poverty, which is another significant factor that deprives the rights of 
57
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
children.
In order to augment the rights of children, in a number of cases, the Indian 
Judiciary has expanded the rights of children by interpreting provisions of the 
Constitution, various statutes and International Human Rights instruments to which 
India is a party highlighting the increasing role of state in the protection and 
promotion of rights of children in the following areas.
Prevention of mental and physical torture
Prevention of Child Sexual Abuse and Trafficking
Prevention of Illegal Adoptions by foster parents
Prevention of Child Labour in hazardous industries
Rehabilitation of girls found in prostitution and trafficking
Right to Compulsory Education of Children
Providing rehabilitation to children of prostitutes
Providing facilities to children in Juvenile Homes and keeping of Child 
offenders in Juvenile Homes
Stream lining of mid-day meal scheme with nutritious food to destitute and 
other poor children
The National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) was set up in 
March 2007 under the Commission for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005. 
According to the provisions of the Act, a child is defined as a person below the age of 
18 years on the lines of the United Nations Child Rights Convention definition.
 The Commission's Mandate is to ensure that all Laws, Policies, Programmes, 
and Administrative Mechanisms are in consonance with the Child Rights 
perspective as enshrined in the Constitution of India and the UN Convention on the 
Rights of the Child.  
The Commission, while enquiring into any matter, has all powers of the Civil 
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
8.  National Commission for the protection Child Rights  
58
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
Court trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedures, 1908 and in particular, with 
respect to the following matters:
Summoning and enforcing the attendance of any 
person from any part of India and examining them on 
oath
Requiring the discovery and production of any 
documents
Receiving evidence on Affidavits
Requisitioning of any Public Record or copy 
thereof from any Court of Office
Issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents
Forwarding cases to Magistrates who have jurisdiction to try the same
On completion of inquiry, the Commission has the powers to take the 
following actions:
To recommend to concerned Government for initiation of proceedings for 
prosecution or other suitable action on finding any violation of child rights and 
provisions of law during the course of an inquiry
To approach the Supreme Court or the High Court concerned for such 
directions, orders or writs as that Court may deem necessary
To recommend to concerned Government or authority for grant of such 
interim relief to the victim or the members of his family as considered necessary
Apart from the above, as per the mandate of the commission, it monitors the 
implementation of various laws, conducts research, and submits periodical reports to 
the government for their implementation considering the best interest of children.
Before the commission was constituted, the National and State Human Rights 
Commissions constituted under the Human Rights Act 1993   used to take care of the 
children’s aspects. Due to the constant and continues efforts of the National  Human 
Rights Commission , a number of issues of children could be augmented in various 
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
Ø
59
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
parts of the country, especially in the areas of bonded labour, child labour in 
hazardous industrial, destitute and street children, right to food, nutritional food, 
right to health etc. The efforts of the National Human Rights Commission resulted in 
amending the civil services rules of India that no civil servant or Government 
employee should appoint a child in their homes for work. If any such incident is 
found, such officer is liable to be severe punishment, which may result even in 
removal of service based on repeated such incidents. 
From independence until now, the government of India and the States adopted 
a number of schemes for the promotion and welfare of children. It has established a  
number of mile stones nationally and internationally to discharge its constitutional 
and international obligations in promoting the best interests of children . However, 
due to increasing population, poverty etc. millions of children are not in a position to 
have a square meal once in a day. Further, the adverse sex ratio of female population 
is a cause for concern. Apart from the state and a few non-governmental 
organizations, the people of the country also need to discharge their bit of services for 
the augmentation of the children’s rights is necessary. 
           Children, the joy of humankind, the gifts of god, need to be treated with utmost 
care, love, affection to enjoy their rights as human beings. Whatever schemes are 
drafted or implemented by the state, without the aid, efforts of the society children 
rights cannot be augmented to achieve self-sufficiency. Let the people of the country 
take a pledge to strive hard to extend their helping hand to one of the vulnerable and 
most effected populous of the country, namely children, the future generations of the 
polity in order to wipe out every tear that comes out of the eyes children. 
In spite of the best efforts undertaken by the United Nations in the promotion of 
the rights of children, a large number of violations are reported especially, during 
Armed Conflicts, and scrupulous activities of traffickers including forcibly selling 
children and violating their privacy through internet. These aspects led the United 
Nations to adopt two important Protocols (additional legal texts to the Convention to 
prevent such activities aimed at the deprivation of life and liberty of children).
9.  Sum up
60
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
61
         UNIT-II MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS                         Answers
1.  Who acted as a chairperson of the drafting committee of 
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights?
A. Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt, first lady of the America.
B. Mr. Ban Ki-Moon
C. DR. B.R. Ambedkar
D. Mr. Kofi Annan.
2.   The convention on the Elimination of All forms of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW) was adopted by UN in the year of.......
A. 1919 B. 2010 C. 1979 D. 1945
3.  To monitor the situations in the promotion of women's rights UN 
adopted an Optional Protocol to the CED AW Convention in
A. 1979 B. 1999 C. 2000 D. 2001
4.   What was conducted during 19th June- 2nd July, 1975 at Mexico?
A. Women's conference.
B.  Gender equality conference
C. The first world Conference on women
D. The second world Conference on women
5.   Every year which day is celebrated as women's day?
A. 10th March 
B. 20th March 
C. 14th February 
D. 8th March 
(A)
(C)
(B)
(C)
(D)
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
6.   Every year on November 25th we celebrate.........
A. International women's day.
B. International women's and child day.
C. International day for elimination of violence against women.
D. International day for elimination of poverty.
7.   What were the reasons behind enactment of National Commission of 
Women's Act 1990?
A. To establish National Commission of Women's to monitor and 
to resolve women related issues.
B. To review constitutional and legal safeguards for women
C. To recommend remedial legislative measures. 
D. All of the above
8.   In 2001 Government of India adopted a National Policy of women. The 
aims and objectives of this policy are:
A. Creating an environment for development of women to enable them to 
realize their full potential. 
B. Equal access to participation and decision making of women in the 
politics and economic life of a nation. 
C.   Eliminating violence against girl child.
D. All of the above
9.   The Convention on the Rights of the Child 1989 was not ratified by
A. United States Of America
B.  Somalia
C. Both 'A' and 'B'
D. None of the above
(D)
(D)
(D)
(C)
62
63
Unit-IIIStatus and Rights of Socially and Economically 
Disadvantaged People
Human Rights belong to everyone regardless of 
any distinction. However, due to socio-cultural and 
other perspectives, some sections of people face greater 
vulnerability. This unit looks at indigenous people, 
persons belonging to Scheduled Castes/Scheduled 
Tribes, older persons, persons with disabilities and 
minority rights. 
1. Status of Indigenous People and the role of UN
n
n
n
n
There are nearly 370 million indigenous people living in the world according 
to available estimates. They are affected by historical colonization and invasion of 
their territories, face discrimination because of their distinct cultures, identities, and 
ways of life. They face marginalization, gender discrimination, extreme poverty, and 
other human rights violations and often dragged into armed conflicts. 
These groups are mostly found in USA, Latin America, Canada, Australia, 
New Zealand and many other countries around the world. In particular, the following 
issues are of particular concern to indigenous people:  
access to land and ancestral territories; 
access to justice and strengthening of indigenous customary law and justice 
systems; 
impact of mining and other extractive industries on indigenous peoples; 
Lack of right to education and health, and 

n
n
2.  Role of UN
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
Discriminatory practices and denial of rights of indigenous women, children 
and youth;  
Review, reform of Legislations  
For these reasons, the above-mentioned areas are also the priorities for the 
United Nations Indigenous Peoples’ Partnership, 
which was launched in 2011. It is a collaborative 
framework established by the International 
Labour Organization (ILO), the Office of the 
United Nations High Commissioner for Human 
Rights (OHCHR), the United Nations Children's 
Fund (UNICEF), and the United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP). United 
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) recently 
signed on to the partnership following its launch in New York. 
Development of human rights standards on indigenous peoples like the 
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and UN Development Group 
Guidelines on Indigenous Peoples Issues
To Train UN Country Teams and  OHCHR field representatives on indigenous 
issues 
Build capacity amongst indigenous peoples, including through its fellowship 
programme for indigenous representatives.
Constitution of Board of Trustees of the Voluntary Fund for Indigenous 
Populations comprised of five indigenous representatives. 
Constitute an Expert Mechanism on the Rights of Indigenous People. It has 
undertaken a study on the right of indigenous people 
to education, and in 
September 2009 , submitted to the Human Rights 
Council.
To study on Issues relating to Indigenous People 
on a permanent basis. 
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
64
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
n
n
n
3.  UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples 2007
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms 
of indigenous peoples
Observance of the First United Nations International Decade of the World’s 
Indigenous Peoples [1995 – 2004] which was followed by the Second International 
Decade 
The Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) carries out a 
range of country specific and regional activities to advance the rights of indigenous 
people. It provides support for legislative initiatives and pursues thematic work on 
issues such as extractive industries and on the rights of isolated indigenous peoples.  
In 2007, the United Nations General Assembly adopted a landmark 
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. 
The Declaration establishes a universal framework of minimum standards for 
the survival, dignity, well-being, and rights of the world's indigenous peoples. It 
addresses “both individual and collective rights; cultural rights and identity; rights to 
education, health, employment, language, and others. It outlaws discrimination 
against indigenous peoples and promotes their full and effective participation in all 
matters that concern them. It also ensures their right to remain distinct and to pursue 
their own priorities in economic, social, and cultural development. 
The Declaration encourages harmonious and cooperative relations between 
States and indigenous peoples. It calls for the maintenance and strengthening of their 
cultural identities, and emphasizes their right to pursue development in keeping with 
their own needs and aspirations. The Declaration states that native peoples have the 
right “to the recognition, observance, and enforcement of treaties” concluded with 
States or their successors.   
The Office of the  UN High Commissioner for Human Rights developed a set 
of guidelines to be adopted by the UN and the member nations in the promotion and 
protection of the rights of Indigenous people. These guidelines mainly aim to guide 
the UN in implementing and monitoring its policy perspectives to adopt specific 
programmes to focus and in mainstreaming the issues of indigenous people.
65
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
4.  SC/ ST and other indigenous peoples in the Indian Legal scenario
ØArticle 14,
ØArticle 15, 
ØArticle 15(4)
ØArticle16, 
The hierarchical caste system along with other socio-cultural practices 
prevailing in India for many centuries has resulted in discrimination and inequality. 
Despite the abolition of “Untouchability” by article 17 of the Indian Constitution, 
segregation of persons belonging to Scheduled Castes persists, particularly in some 
pockets of rural India, in access to places of worship, housing, hospitals, education, 
water sources, markets and other public places. 
The framers of the Indian Constitution provided for many provisions to 
address historical injustices. The Fundamental Rights contained in Part III of the 
Constitution, consisting of Articles 12 to 35, is considered the ‘sole’ of the 
Constitution Accordingly, to augment the rights of these communities the Union and 
the States of the country enacted  a number of legislative enactments. Some of these 
articles are stated here in for an understanding of the constitutional position. 
stipulates that the State shall not deny to any person equality before 
the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of India. It also 
prohibits the practice of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex 
or place of birth. The state adopted a number
the State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only 
of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them. It specifically adds 
that no citizen shall be subjected to any kind of disability,  liability, restriction 
or condition with regard to access to shops, public restaurants, hotels, and 
places of public entertainment; or to the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, 
roads and places of public resort maintained wholly or partly out of State Funds 
or dedicated to the use of general public.
 permits the State to make special provision for the advancement 
of any socially and educationally backward class of citizens as well as 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. It is under this provision that the 
States and the Union are permitted to make reservations in educational 
institutions for these groups of citizens.
provides for equality of opportunity in matters of public 
employment. It also stipulates that no citizen shall on grounds only of religion
 
Ø
66
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
 race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any of them, be ineligible 
for, or discriminated against in respect of employment or office under the State. 
This Article further provides for affirmative action, through the reservation of 
appointments or posts, in favour of any backward class of citizens, which, in 
the opinion of the State, not adequately represented in the services of the State. 
It also covers promotions and provides further for the carry-forward of unfilled 
vacancies of the quota for succeeding years. The Court reiterated that Article 14 
guarantees the general right of equality; Articles 15 and 16 are instances of the 
same right in favour of citizens in some special circumstances.
abolishes “Untouchability”, and forbids its practice in any form.
which protects life and personal liberty, mandates that “No person 
shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure 
established by law”.  The Supreme Court of India while interpreting the real 
meaning of this Article has stated that “Life”, in Article 21, does not mean only 
animal existence but also to live with dignity
In the words of Justice Krishna Iyer,
prohibits trafficking in human beings and forced labour. Clause 
(1) of this article further prohibits all forms of forced labour, including selling 
and buying human beings as slaves and also includes immoral traffic in women 
and  children for immoral or other purposes.
no person be denied of admission to any educational institution 
on grounds only of religion, race,  caste, language or any of them.
of the Constitution are termed as “The Directive Principles of 
State Policy”, which are fundamental in the governance of the country and the 
Ø
ØArticle 21, 
‘… necessary conditions which must be fulfilled if everyone in the society is to 
be assured a life of basic human dignity and complete self-fulfillment which is 
the objective and goal of human rights. … I do not want any people just to 
survive. I want them to live a life of human dignity and for that they must have 
the basic necessities of life including food and health. This right is not merely 
lexical and legal, but expands as we conceptualize the dignity and divinity of 
the human personality.’
ØArticle 23,  
ØArticle 29(2), 
ØArticle 36 to 51 
Article 17,  
Ø
67
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
State is mandated to apply these principles in making laws and to secure a 
social order in which social, economic and political justice shall in all the 
institutions of national life.
the State has a duty to draft its policy formulations to ensure 
equal treatment to all its citizens in securing and to see that the right to an 
adequate means of livelihood be met. Under Article 39 (d), the State shall direct 
its policy towards securing equal pay for equal work for both men and women.  
Further Article 39 (e) is aimed at protecting the health and strength of workers, 
both men and women.
 of the Constitution imposes an obligation upon the State to make 
provisions for securing just and humane conditions of work and for maternity 
relief. The Supreme Court held that the benefits under the Maternity Benefits 
Act, 1961 extend to employees who are casual workers or workers employed 
on daily wage basis. 
 provides that the State shall endeavour to secure for the citizens, a 
Uniform Civil Code, throughout the territory of India. However, for assorted 
reasons, the state could not achieve this objective of the constitution until date. 
Accordingly, even while ratifying the CEDAW Convention, the Government 
of India reserved the clause on Uniform Civil Code.   
 enjoins the State to promote with special care towards the 
educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people, and in 
particular of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and to protect 
them from social injustice and all forms of exploitation. Based on this provision 
coupled with other provisions of the constitution, the state has introduced a 
number of steps in the form of concessions.
 of the Constitution of India lays down certain Fundamental 
Duties upon every citizen of India . Accordingly, the citizens are expected to 
respect the law of the land to denounce all kinds of discriminatory practices, to 
Ø
ØArticle 42
ØArticle 44
ØArticle 46
ØArticle 51-A
Article 39(a), 
Randhir Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1982 SC 879; see also, State of M.P. v. PramodBhartiya, AIR 1993 SC 286.  To give effect to this Article, the 
Parliament has enacted the Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 which provides for payment of equal wages to both women and men workers and 
prevents discrimination on the ground of sex.
In pursuance of this Article, the State has enacted the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, the Employees State Insurance Act, 1948, the 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948, the Maternity Benefit Act 1961, the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965.
Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Female Workers (Muster Roll), AIR 2000 SC 1274
  The Fundamental duties were added under Part IV of the Constitution through the Forty-Second Amendment of the Constitution in 1976.
68
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
extend their support to the socially, economically, and culturally weaker 
sections of the society to augment their rights on par with the other developed 
sections of the Polity.
 prohibits disenfranchisement on grounds of caste. 
 of the Constitution of India provide for reservation 
of seats for women in election to the Panchayat and the Municipalities. This 
provision enabled the state to reserve seats in  various parts of the country to 
reserve seats to women especially that of the reserved categories. 
 provide for the reservation of seats for members of the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Union and State Legislatures.
 states that the claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes shall be taken into consideration, consistently with the 
maintenance of efficiency of administration, in the making of appointments to 
services and posts in the affairs of the Union or of a State. In order to strengthen 
this provision, the Eighty Second Amendment Act 2000, provided that nothing 
in this article shall prevent in making of any provision in favour of the members 
of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes for relaxation in qualifying 
marks in any examination or lowering the standards of evaluation, for 
reservation in matters of promotion to any class or classes of services or posts.
of the Constitution, Scheduled Castes are such 
castes, races, tribes, or groups within such castes, races, or tribes, which have 
been declared as such by the President of India through a public notification for 
each state. 
of the Constitution, the Scheduled Tribes are such 
tribes or tribal communities, or groups within these tribes or tribal 
communities, which have been declared as such by the President through a 
public notification for each state. 
 defines Scheduled Castes and to mean such castes, 
races or tribes or parts of or groups within such castes, races or tribes as are 
deemed under Article 341 to be Scheduled Castes for the purposes of the 
Ø
ØArticles 243 D and 243 T
ØArticles 330 & 333
ØArticle 335,
ØAccording to Article 341 
ØAccording to Article 342 
ØArticle 366 clause (24)
Article 325
In furtherance to  73rd and 74th Amendments to the Constitution, the Constitution (81st Amendment) Bill was introduced in the 
Parliament in 1996 to reserve one-third of seats for women in the LokSabha and the State Assemblies, and is yet to receive the 
asset of the Parliament.
69
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
Constitution.
 defines “Schedule Tribes” means such tribes or tribal 
communities or parties of or groups within such tribes or tribal communities as 
are deemed under Article 342 to be Scheduled Tribes for the purpose of this 
Constitution.
In addition to Constitutional provisions, a number of legislations were enacted 
to end discrimination against Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. These 
include:
The Protection of Civil Rights (Anti-Untouchability) Act, 1955.
The Bonded Labour (Abolition) Act, 1976.
The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 
1989.
The Employment of Manuel Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrines 
(Prohibition) Act, 1993.
As Per the Government of India 2011 Census, the SC’s constitutes around 
16.2% population of the country,  166,635,700 .
As per the Government of India 2011, 
census, the Scheduled Tribes population 
comprise 84,326,240 (8.2%) of the total 
populations. The State with highest 
proportion of Scheduled Tribes is Mizoram 
(94.5%), while the lowest proportion being 
Goa (0.04%).  
The following are some important 
characteristics of STs:-
Geographical isolation - They live in cloister, exclusive remote and 
inhospitable areas like hills and forests;
Backwardness- Livelihood based on primitive agriculture, low cost closed 
economy based on low level of technology which leads to their poverty and 
have have a low level of literacy, employment and health.
Ø
n
n
n
n
n
5.  Scheduled Tribes
n
n
Article 366 (25)
70

HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
n
The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
Distinctive culture, language and religion   
These communities are generally associated with a territory or a habitat, 
mostly in hilly and forest regions. They are governed by their own customs and 
traditions. Many of them have their own distinct language or dialect. 
 has noted the 
non-implementation of the right of ownership, collective or individual, of the 
members of tribal communities over the lands traditionally occupied by them in its 
practice concerning tribal peoples. It also expressed concern that large scale projects 
such as the construction of several dams in Manipur and other north-eastern States on 
territories primarily inhabited by tribal communities, or of the Andaman Trunk Road, 
are carried out without seeking their prior informed consent. These projects result in 
the forced resettlement or endanger the traditional lifestyles of the communities 
concerned.
About 87 percent of the main workers from STs were engaged in agriculture. 
The proportion of Scheduled Tribes below the poverty line is substantially higher 
than the national average. The estimate of poverty made by Planning Commission 
for the year 1993-94 shows that 51.92 percent rural and 41.4 percent urban 
Scheduled Tribes were still living below the poverty line.
The Constitution of India incorporates several special provisions for the 
promotion of educational and economic interests of Scheduled Tribes and their 
71
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
protection from social injustice and all forms of exploitation. “These objectives are 
sought to be achieved through a strategy known as the Tribal Sub-Plan strategy, 
which was adopted at the beginning of the Fifth Five Year Plan. The strategy seeks to 
ensure adequate flow of funds for tribal development form the State Plan allocations, 
schemes/programmes of Central Ministries/Departments, financial and 
Developmental Institutions.
The gap in the literacy front may be seen from the fact that as per 2001 census, 
literacy among ST population was only 47.10% as compared to 64.84% in the 
general population. It is much more problematic when it comes to tribal women. 
Only 34.76% of tribal women were literate while the corresponding figure for the 
general population is 53.67%.
By virtue of the Constitution (Sixty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1990, the 
Government of India Constituted a 
 for the promotion and protection of their legal rights. 
However, in order to  specifically cater to needs of schedule casts and scheduled 
tribes, the government in 2004 bifurcated the Commission and constituted two 
separate commissions viz., National Commission for Scheduled Castes and the 
National Commission for Scheduled Tribes respectively.
The judiciary has also in a number of cases upheld the validity of various acts 
of the government for the promotion and protection of the rights of these categories 
of people and has also directed the state many a times to evolve a number of policy 
formulations in order to promote, protect and preserve their interests.
Elderly persons face a number of problems. These include, 
among others, physical and financial security, abuse, neglect 
etc. Human rights belong to every person whether that person 
is old or young and regardless of other distinctions. 
The increased life expectancy has led to an increase in the number of persons   
who are in the age group of 60 and above. According to the UN, there are about 737 
National Commission for Scheduled Castes 
and Schedules Tribes
6.  Rights of the Elderly Persons 
 7.  International Scenario
72

HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
million older people are living in the world by the year 2009. By 2050 as per the 
projection the figure may touch around 2 billion. India is poised to have the second   
largest number of older persons in the world. The 60 plus population is  projected to 
increase to 100 million in 2013 and to 198 million in 2030.   
The question of ageing emerged as an important issue for discussion since the 
inception of United Nations.  In 1971, the General Assembly asked the Secretary-
General to prepare a comprehensive report on the elderly and to suggest guidelines 
for the national and international action. Following the decision of the General 
Assembly in 1978 for holding a World Conference on Ageing, the World Assembly 
on Ageing was held in Vienna from July 26 to August 6, 1982, wherein an 
International Plan of Action on Ageing was adopted.  Besides, it also adapted the 
following:
In 1992, the U.N. General Assembly adopted the proclamation to observe the 
year 1999 as the International Year of the Older Persons;
The U.N. General Assembly has declared “1st October” as the International Day 
for the Elderly, later rechristened as the International Day of the Older Persons.
The U.N. General Assembly on December 16, 1991 adopted 18 principles, which 
are organized into five clusters, namely-independence, participation, care, self-
fulfillment, and dignity of the older persons.
In has conducted World Conference on aged people to address the rights of 
theirs. Among them Second Global Conference conducted in the year 2002 at Madrid 
adopted a Plan of Action with three important Priority areas to rights relating to  
Older people. These areas are :
Older Persons and Development;
Advancing  health and well-being into old age; and
Ensuring enabling and supportive environments.  
Apart from conducting World conferences on Elderly people, it has entrusted 
the work to the Economic and Social Council to work in close association with other 
organs and the various  States to adopt policies in the promotion and protection of the 
rights of elderly persons. A number of other working groups, special commissions 
also constituted, to monitor and to continuously evolve various issues relating to 
elderly people and to assist the nation-states in policymaking.
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
73
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
8.  Indian Scenario
n
n
n
n
n
n
There are about 70 million elderly people, who are 60 years and above living in 
India. The number is expected to touch 177 million by 2025. The aged in India  have 
a number of pressing concerns which include, amongst others, abuse  of the elderly, 
safety of persons and property, medical facilities and medical  insurance, old age 
homes, pensions, crime against older people, loneliness,  shrinking finances and 
health and nutrition etc.
The special features of the elderly population in Indian context are as   follows:   
Increased life expectancy increase in the number of the oler persons up to the age 
of  80 years;
Increased number of females  of the elderly population
75% to 80% of elderly persons live  in the rural areas, thus making service 
delivery a challenge and
30 % of the elderly are leading their life under the   Below Poverty Line [BPL]
Abuse of the rights of elderly at the domestic front.
In India, the Constitution under Article 41 directs the state, within the limits of 
economic capacity and development, to make effective provisions for securing the 
right to public assistance in cases of old age.
The Government of India adopted a National Policy for Older Persons on January 13, 
1998 in order to accelerate welfare measures and empower the elderly in ways 
beneficial to them. The Policy, among others, provides that:
a) Parents cannot be evicted from the house in contravention of the law.
b) As per the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, an aged parent is entitled to 
maintenance from their children.
c) According to section 125 of CrPC (Criminal 
Procedure Code) a magistrate can order a 
person to maintain his old parents under the 
maintenance of Parents Act. But the parent 
has to prove that the son has neglected or 
refused to maintain the parent and that he or 
she is unable to maintain himself / herself.
d) As per the provisions of the Domestic 
74

HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
Violence Act, the elderly parents have a right to seek relief from any kind of 
abuse.
The Government enacted the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior 
Citizens Act 2007 as an answer to the insecurities faced by older persons of the 
country. This Act accords prime responsibility, on children, grand children or even 
relatives, who may possibly inherit the property of their parents/ grandparents to 
maintain and protect the rights of such elderly people. It also calls upon the State to 
provide facilities for poor and destitute older persons. 
Parents who are unable to maintain themselves through their own earnings or out 
of their own property may apply for maintenance from their adult children. The 
maintenance includes the provision for proper food, shelter, clothing and medical 
treatment.
Parents include biological, adoptive and stepmothers and fathers, whether senior 
citizens or not.
A childless Senior Citizen who is sixty years and above, can also claim 
maintenance from relatives who are in possession of or are likely to inherit their 
property.
The application for maintenance may be made by Senior Citizens themselves or 
they may authorize a person or voluntary organization to do so. The Tribunal may 
also take action on its own.
Tribunals on receiving these applications may hold an enquiry or order the 
children/ relatives to pay an interim monthly allowance for the maintenance of 
their Parents or Senior Citizen.
If the Tribunal is satisfied that children or relatives have neglected or refused to 
take care of their parents or Senior Citizen, it shall order them to provide a 
monthly maintenance amount, up to a maximum of Rs.10,000 per month.
The State Government is required to set up one or more tribunals in every sub-
division. It shall also set up Appellate Tribunals in every district to hear the 
9. MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS AND SENIOR 
CITIZENS  ACT - 2007
The Salient features of the Act are :
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
75
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
appeals of Senior Citizens against the decision of the Tribunals.
No legal practitioner is required or permitted for this process.
Erring persons are punishable with imprisonment up to three months or a fine of 
up to rupees five thousand or with both.
State Governments should set up at least one Old Age Home for every 150 
beneficiaries in a district. These homes are to provide Senior Citizens with 
minimum facilities such as food, clothing and recreational activities.
All Government hospitals or those funded by the Government must provide beds 
for Senior Citizens as far as possible. Also, special queues to access medical 
facilities should be arranged for them.
Over 650 million persons around the world live with disabilities. Adding to that their 
extended families, and a staggering two billion people daily live with disabilities. In 
every region, and in every country in the world, persons with disabilities often live on 
the margins of society, deprived of some of life’s fundamental experiences. They 
have little hope of going to school, securing a job, having their own home, creating a 
family and raising their children, enjoying a social life etc. For the vast majority of 
the world’s persons with disabilities, shops, public facilities and transport, and even 
information are largely out of reach. Disability is associated with illiteracy, poor 
nutrition, lack of access to clean water, low rates of immunization against diseases, 
and unhealthy and dangerous 
working conditions.
Persons with disabilities make up 
the world’s largest and most 
disadvantaged minority. The 
numbers are unfavorable:
an estimated 20 per cent of the 
world’s poorest persons are those 
with disabilities; 
98 per cent of children with 
d i s a b i l i t i e s  i n  d e v e l o p i n g
n
n
n
n
n
10.  Rights of Persons with Disability
?

76
A class for Children with Hearing and Speech Impairment
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
     countries  do not attend school; 
an estimated 30 per cent of the world’s street children live with disabilities; 
Literacy rate for adults with disabilities is as low as 3 per cent.
In some countries persons with disabilities often face discrimination and                              
marginalization. 
Disability is a broad term. It generally refers to any person suffering from 
physical, cognitive, mental, sensory, emotional, developmental problems, or some 
combination of any of these problems.
The term Disability includes within its meaning, impairments, activity 
limitations, and participatory restrictions. Impairment is a problem of body function 
or structure; an activity limitation is a difficulty encountered by an individual in 
executing a task or action; while a participatory restriction is a problem experienced 
by an individual in numerous life situations. Thus, disability is a complex 
phenomenon, reflecting an interaction between features of a person’s body and 
features of the society in which he or she lives.
According to World Health Organization,
An individual may also qualify as disabled if he/she has had an impairment in the 
past or is seen as disabled based on a personal or group standard or  norm. Such 
impairments may include physical, sensory, and cognitive or developmental 
disabilities, Mental disorders  (also known as psychiatric or psychosocial disability) 
and various types of chronic disease may also qualify as disabilities.
Accordingly, disabilities may be of various types such as Physical Disability, Mental 
Disability, Sensory Disability, Visual Disability or hearing impairment etc. 
In order to augment the rights of disabled persons, the United Nations adopted a 
Convention and a Protocol in 2006 and established a special agency called as UN 
Enable, which works in close coordination with various organs of the UN. The 
Convention intends to be a human rights instrument with explicit, social 
development dimension. It adopts a broad categorization of persons with disabilities 
?
?
?
11.  Definition of Disability
12.  UN and the Disabled
77
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
and reaffirms that all persons with different types of disabilities must enjoy all human 
rights and fundamental freedoms. 
According to the 
 disability arises from an interaction between a non-inclusive society 
and individuals:
?Person using a wheelchair might have 
difficulties gaining employment, not 
because of the wheelchair, but because 
there are manmade environmental 
barriers; such as unfavourable 
transportation, or other such inhospitable 
facilities to exercise their rights freely. 
?Persons with extreme near-sightedness 
who do not have access to corrective 
lenses may not be able to perform daily 
tasks.  This same person with 
prescription eyeglasses would be able to perform all tasks without problems. 
The Preamble of CRPD states: ‘Disability is an 
evolving concept, and that disability results from the 
interaction between persons with impairments and 
attitudinal and environmental barriers that hinders full 
and effective participation in society on an equal basis 
with others’
Article 1 of the Convention states: 
‘Persons with disabilities include those who have long-
term physical, mental, intellectual or sensory impairments which in interaction with 
various barriers may hinder their full and effective participation in society on an 
equal basis with others’.
Persons with disabilities need not be viewed as "objects" of charity. They need 
to be considered as "subjects" with rights. Further, they need to be provided with 
equal opportunities in order to enable them to take decisions on their own and to 
UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
(CPRD), 2006,
78
Access to Information Technology 
enables Person with Visually Impairment
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
exercise 
their rights freely on par with the other members of society. 
The UN adopted a set guiding principles that need to be followed and adopted by 
every state and society in order to foster respect for the human rights of the disabled. 
They are: 
Full and effective participation and inclusion of the Disable into the various 
activities of the society;
To Foster Respect for their Dignity and autonomy;
To provide equal opportunities on par with other sections of the society
To extend Equality between men and Women of the disabled without any 
further discrimination on grounds of sex
To provide Accessibility in all respects equally with other persons of the state
Respect for difference of their human diversity
lNon-discrimination on any ground  
The principles of International Law of human rights of disabled persons are 
reflected in Indian Constitution by way of provisions dealing with Fundamental 
Rights as well as Articles on Directive Principles of State Policy.  The Constitution 
does not provide for any specific provision dealing with the rights of disabled 
persons. However, Entry 9 of the State List in the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution refers to – Relief of the disabled and unemployable. Apart from the 
constitutional provisions, the Government of India enacted specific legislations for 
the protection and augmentation of the Rights of the Disabled.
In order to discharge its international and constitutional obligations, the 
government of India has enacted a number of legislations concerning the rights of 
differently 
abled persons. Among the various legislations, the most important of them are: 
The Indian Lunacy Act 1912,
The Lepers Act, 1899.
l
l
l
l
l
l
13.  Rights of Persons with Disability in India
14.   Laws Relating to Disabled
?
?
79
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
?
?
?
?
UN Convention and Protocol on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities, 2006. 
15.  The Minorities and Human Rights
 16.  The Efforts of the International Community
Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full 
Participation) Act 1995
National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental 
Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act 1999.
Rehabilitation Council of India Act 1992 
The Mental Health Act 1987.
Under the Persons with Disabilities Act 1995, disability means, any person 
suffering not less than 40% of any disability as certified by a medical authority.  The 
provisions of the Act further include disability as Blindness; Low Vision; Leprosy-
Cured; Hearing Impairment; Loco-motor disability; Mental Retardation and Mental 
illness as part and partial of the concept of disability. 
In order to ensure its commitment for the development of the rights of disabled, 
India has signed and ratified the 
It has assumed all legal obligations without making 
any reservations. The judiciary in India, has in a number of cases, also upheld the 
rights of disabled persons by liberally interpreting the provisions of the Constitution 
and the law. It has admonished the discriminatory practices adopted by any section of 
the society including the state in contravention of the provisions 
of the various acts.  
Human rights being the inalienable rights of humanity, 
need protection at all times either by the state or by international 
comity. However, many a times, among the various vulnerable 
groups, minority’s rights are not given due respect and relegated 
to secondary position. The International and national 
scenario is subtly examined. 
Legal protection for minorities began with the system of minority rights 
created under the League of Nations through special treaties with Central and 
Eastern European states. However, until the adoption of the Charter of UN, there was 
80

HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
no specific legal instrument in international law dealing with the rights of minorities. 
Though the Charter and some of the Conventions of human rights recognized the 
rights of the minorities, until the end of Cold War, the issue of minority’s rights was 
not given due consideration and recognition by the comity of nations. It is after the 
Cold War, in the third phase of globalization and liberalization in late sixties and 
early seventies, the rights of minorities too gained currency internationally.  
 Even now, after the adoption of a number of instruments on human rights, 
there is no uniform standard definition of ‘minority.’ Lack of a uniform standard 
definition, led the UN Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and 
Protection of Minorities to formulate an acceptable definition. 
In spite of the efforts of the Special Rapporteur in carving out a definition of 
minorities, due to perceptional differences between states on minorities, often it is 
considered that the definition is not exhaustive enough to include all types of 
minorities under its fold.  These perceptional differences amongst states led to non-
recognition of the above definition. In the absence of a standard definition, each 
country adopts its own definition based on its own policy perspectives. 
Consequently, minorities encounter many problems in their day-to-day life across 
the World.
In spite of crystallization of number of legal regulations through various 
Covenants, Conventions by the principles of international law, the protection of 
minorities has been slow and fragmented due to definitional differences. Among the 
various instruments, the 
 is the first one to address the protection of minorities 
through genocide without using the term minorities.
 Apart from the above convention, the following legal instruments have 
provisions addressing the various aspects relating to the rights of minorities. There 
According to Mr. Francesco Capootori, Special Rapporteur of the Sub 
Commission, a minority is, “a group numerically inferior to the rest of the 
population of a state, in a non-dominant position, whose members-being nationals of 
the State-possess ethnic, religious or linguistic characteristics differing from those 
of the rest of the population and show, if only implicitly, a sense  of solidarity, directed 
towards preserving their culture, traditions, religion or language.”
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the 
Crime of Genocide 1948
81
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
are as follows:
Convention on the Elimination of All forms of Discrimination 1965; 
International Convention of Economic Social and Cultural Rights, 1966; 
International Convention on Civil and political Rights, 1966; 
The Child Rights Convention, 1989; 
The UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education 1960;
The UNESCO Convention on Race and Racial Prejudice 1978; 
UN Declaration on the Rights of the Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, 
Religious and Linguistic Minorities 1992
Among all the instruments, the ICCPR 1966 is the most directly binding 
instrument on the States parties that address the rights of minorities. Article 27 of 
ICCPR imposes an obligation on the states   in recognizing the status of minorities. 
Accordingly, a state, which recognizes the status of minorities, is under an obligation 
not to deny the rights in community with other members of their groups, to enjoy 
their own culture, to profess and practice their own religion, or to use their own 
language.  If a state has not categorized minorities from that of the majority of the 
populace of the state, the minorities have no claim. 
According to the principles of international law of human rights any 
discrimination shown against the recognition of minority rights, constitutes a 
violation of the provisions of UN Charter and human rights instruments. Since there 
is no instrument directly dealing with the rights of minorities in the international 
sphere, in 1992, the General Assembly adopted a Declaration on the 
The Declaration contains nine provisions. According to Article 2 of the Declaration, 
in general, minorities possess the following rights: 
To enjoy their own culture, to profess and practice their own religion, and to 
use their own language, in private and public freely without any discrimination 
and interference by the state or any group;
To participate effectively, cultural, religious, social, economic and public life;
To Participate in the decision making process of the State effectively 
especially any act or acts which affect them either directly or indirectly;
To establish and to maintain  institutions of their own; and
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
Rights of 
Persons, Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities.
?
?
?
?
82
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
?
17. Minorities and India
To establish contacts freely with in themselves and other groups of minorities 
within and outside the State. 
Since the Declaration is not a binding legal instrument, the UN High 
Commission on Human Rights requested the UN High Commissioner on Human 
Rights to appoint an independent expert to submit frequent reports on the situation in 
extending protection to the rights of the minorities.  The High Commissioner, taking 
into consideration of the request of the Commission on July 29, 2005 appointed Ms. 
Gay Mcdou Gall of USA as the first independent expert to submit reports on various 
aspects relating to the protection of rights of minorities across the globe. Individuals 
also can submit requests or reports and bring in any aspect relating to the rights of the 
minorities. 
It is true that most countries in the world have minorities among their 
population.  It is also true that the experience of the minorities varies depending on 
their socio, economic, political, legal, and cultural experiences. However, the 
problems faced by them are mostly common to all.  For example, the Sexual 
Minorities rights of lesbians, gays, transgender (third sex) and homosexuals are yet 
to be recognised by majority of nations.  In spite of the opposition from a number of 
countries, the UN has formally recognised the global organisations of these 
minorities and has appealed to all nations to recognise their human rights as part of 
humanity.
According to the Government of India Gazette notification issued on 23rd 
October 1993 by Ministry of Welfare, five religious communities viz; the Muslims, 
Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists and Zoroastrians (Parsis) were notified as minority 
communities. As per the 2001 Census, these five religious minority communities 
constitute 18.42% of the country’s population.
To protect the rights of minorities, the Constitution of India made exclusive 
provisions for the protection and free exercise of their human rights. Articles 25 to 28 
of the Constitution guarantee the right to freedom of religion, including freedom of 
conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion. Articles 29 and 
30 of the Constitution, protects the cultural and educational rights of minorities. In 
83
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
order to guarantee the rights of Minorities, the Union and the States adopted a 
number of policies and extended a large number of concessions on various fronts. In 
a number of cases, the Indian Judiciary has also upheld the provisions of the 
constitution and supplemented the policy perspectives of the Union and the States. 
Though the Constitution of India does not define the word ‘Minority’, it only 
refers to ‘Minorities’ and speaks of those minorities that are ‘based on religion or 
language through Article 30. Accordingly, Muslims, Christians, Parsis,  Buddhists, 
Sikhs and Jains are normally considered as Minorities in India. In the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir, Mizoram, Meghalaya and Lakshadweep Hindus are considered as a 
religious minority .  The other articles applicable to all the citizens are applicable to 
minorities too. In a number of judgments, the courts have liberally interpreted the 
provisions of the constitution in tune with the human rights philosophy and upheld 
the various concessions extended by the state to minorities.  
The Constitution provides two sets of rights of minorities that can be placed in 
‘common domain’ and ‘separate domain’. The rights, which fall, in the ‘common 
domain’ are those, which are applicable to both minorities and non-minorities. The 
rights, which fall in the ‘separate domain’, are those exclusively applicable to 
minorities. The distinction between ‘common domain’ and ‘separate domain’ and 
their combination have been well balanced and protected by the Constitution. The 
Preamble to the Constitution declares the State to be ‘Secular’ and this is especially 
relevant for the Religious Minorities. Equally relevant for them, is the declaration of 
the Constitution in its Preamble that all citizens of India are to be secured ‘liberty of 
thought, expression, belief, faith and worship and ‘equality of status and of 
opportunity.’
18.  Constitutional rights and safeguards provided to the minorities in India
1. Constitutional safeguards for religious and linguistic minorities of India
2. ‘Common Domain’ and ‘Separate Domain’ of rights of minorities provided in 
the Constitution
3. ‘Common Domain’, the Directive Principles of State Policy – Part IV of the 
84
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
Constitution 
?
?
4. ‘Common Domain’, the Fundamental Duties – Part IVA of the Constitution
?
?
5. ‘Common Domain’, the Fundamental Rights – Part III of the Constitution
?
?
?
Part IV of the Constitution of India, containing non-justiciable Directive 
Principles of State Policy, includes the following provisions having significant 
implications for the Minorities :-
obligation of the State ‘to endeavour to eliminate inequalities in status, facilities 
and opportunities’ amongst individuals and groups of people residing in different 
areas or engaged in different vocations;[Article 38 (2) ]
obligation of State ‘to promote with special care’ the educational and economic 
interests of ‘the weaker sections of the people’ (besides Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes); [Article 46] 
Part IVA of the Constitution, relating to Fundamental Duties as provided in 
Article 51 A applies in full to all citizens, including those belonging to Minorities. 
Article 51 A which is of special relevance for the Minorities stipulates as under :-
citizens’ duty to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst 
all the people of India ‘transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional 
diversities; and 
citizens’ duty to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture.’
The Constitution has provided a definite space for both the ‘domains’ i.e. 
‘common’ as well as ‘separate’. In Part III of the Constitution, which deals with the 
Fundamental Rights it is divided into two parts viz. (a) the rights that fall in the 
‘common domain’ and (b) the rights which fall under ‘separate domain’. In the 
‘common domain’, the following fundamental rights and freedoms are covered:
people’s right to ‘equality before the law’ and ‘equal protection of the 
laws’[Article 14]
prohibition of discrimination against citizens on grounds of religion, race, 
caste, sex or place of birth; [Article 15 (1) & (2)]
authority of State to make ‘any special provision for the advancement of any 
85
 Irfan Engineer:  Rights of Minorities under the Constitution of India, http://twocircles.net/2007may13/rights-minorities-
under-constitution-india.html
socially and educationally backward classes of citizens’ (besides the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes); [Article 15 (4)]
citizens’ right to ‘equality of opportunity’ in matters relating to employment or 
appointment to any office under the State – and prohibition in this regard of 
discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth; [Article 
16(1)&(2)]
authority of State to make ‘any provision for the reservation of appointments 
or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the 
State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State; [Article 
16(4)]
people’s freedom of conscience and right to freely profess, practice and 
propagate religion – subject to public order, morality and other Fundamental 
Rights; [Article 25(1)]
right of ‘every religious denomination or any section thereof – subject to 
public order, morality and health – to establish and maintain institutions for 
religious and charitable purposes, ‘manage its own affairs in matters of 
religion’, and own and acquire movable immovable property and administer it 
‘in accordance with law’; [Article 26]
prohibition against compelling any person to pay taxes for promotion of any 
particular religion’; [Article 27]
people’s ‘freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship 
in educational institutions’ wholly maintained, recognized, or aided by the 
State.[Article 28]
 ‘Separate Domain’ of Minority Rights
The Minority Rights provided in the Constitution that fall in the category of 
‘Separate Domain’ are as under:-
right of ‘any section of the citizens’ to ‘conserve’ its ‘distinct language, script 
or culture’; [Article 29(1)]
restriction on denial of admission to any citizen, to any educational institution 
maintained or aided by the State, ‘on grounds only of religion, race, caste, 
language or any of them’; [Article 29(2)]
right of all Religious and Linguistic Minorities to establish and administer 
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
86
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
educational institutions of their 
choice;[Article 30(1)]
freedom of Minority-managed 
educational institutions from 
discrimination in the matter of 
receiving aid from the State;[Article 
30(2)]
special provision relating to the 
language spoken by a section of the 
population of any State;[Article 347]
provision for facilities for instruction in mother-tongue at primary 
stage;[Article 350 A]
provision for a Special Officer for Linguistic Minorities and his duties; and 
[Article 350 B]
Sikh community’s right of ‘wearing and carrying of kirpans; [Explanation 1 
Article 25] 
In spite of the constitutional guarantee, and legal enactments, there is a sense of 
insecurity, inequality and discrimination that persists among the minorities. In order 
to wipe out such feelings, and to augment their rights, the Government of India in the 
year 1992 enacted a National Commission for Minorities Act.  Accordingly, in the 
year 1993, it established a Minority Commission. According to Section 9 of the Act, 
the commission exercises the following functions to augment the rights of the 
minorities. 
evaluation of the progress of the development of minorities under the Union 
and States;
monitor the working of the safeguards for minorities provided in the 
Constitution and in laws enacted by Parliament and the State Legislatures;
To make recommendations for the effective implementation of safeguards for 
the protection of the interests of minorities by the central or state governments;
To look into specific complaints regarding deprivation of rights and safeguards 
?
?
?
?
?
 19.  National Commission for Minorities :
?
?
?
?
87

of minorities and taking up such matters with the appropriate authorities;
To undertake studies into the problems arising out of any discrimination 
against minorities and recommending measures for their removal; 
To conduct studies, research and analysis on the issues relating to socio-
economic and educational development of minorities; 
To suggest appropriate measures in respect of any minority to be undertaken 
by the Central Government or the State Governments; 
To make periodical or special reports to the Central Government or any matter 
pertaining to minorities and in 
particular the difficulties confronted by 
them; and
On any other matter, which may be 
referred to it by the Central Government 
 In the year 2006, the Government of 
India established a separate Ministry to 
augment the rights of Minorities in the 
country.  The aim and objectives of the Ministry are to ensure more focused approach 
towards issues relating to minorities. Its responsibility is to facilitate formulation of 
policy perspectives, planning, coordination, evaluation and review of the regulatory 
framework and developmental programmes for the benefit of the minority 
communities. It is also the vision of the Ministry to develop a healthy environment 
for the free exercise of rights by minorities and to halt all kinds of discriminatory 
practices.
The above brief discussion subtly brings out that both at international and 
national sphere there are a number of initiatives that have been adopted for the 
promotion of the rights of the socially and economically disadvantaged people. 
However, in spite of this, a number of discriminatory practices adopted towards these 
groups are witnesses in many societies across the world. It is the duty of the majority 
?
?
?
?
?
20.  Minorities Ministry 
21. Sum Up 
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
88

HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
89
      UNIT-III MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS                              Answers
1)  What is the contribution of UN Declaration on the 
Rights of Indigenous People-2007?
A. It establishes a universal frame work of minimum
standards for the survival, dignity, well-being, and 
the rights of the world's indigenous people. 
B. It addresses both individual and collective rights, cultural rights. 
C. Both 'A' and 'B' 
D. None of the above
2)  When United Nations first announced International decade 
of the world's indigenous peoples?
A.  1995-2004
B.  1990-2000
C. 2000-2010
D. 1940-1950
3)  Which articles under Indian constitution provide the reservation
of seats for members of the Scheduled Casts and Scheduled 
Tribes in Union and State Legislatures?
A. Article 21 and 19
B.  Article 330 and 333
C. Article 17 and 325
D. Article 51-Aand42
4)  Which Amendment Act in Indian constitution made Government 
of India to constitute National Commission for Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes?
A. The Constitution (sixty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1990.
B. The Constitution (fifty -fifth Amendment) Act, 1975.
C. The Constitution (fifty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1980.
D. The Constitution (sixty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1990.
5)  In 1992, the United Nation General Assembly adopted the 
proclamation to observe the year....... ..As the International 
a Year of the Older Persons.
A. 1992
B. 1999
C. 1993
(C)
(A)
(B)
(A)
(B)
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
90
6)  Which acts in India talks about laws relating to Disabled persons?
A. The Indian Lunacy Act, 1912
B. The Lepers Act, 1899
C. The mental health Act, 1987 :
D. All of the above
7)  Which of the following legal instruments have provisions 
addressing the various aspects relating to the rights of minorities?
A. Convention on the Elimination of All forms 
of Discrimination, 1965
B. The UNESCO Convention against Discrimination
in Education 1960
C. The UNESCO Convention on race and racial
prejudice 1978.
D. All of the above
8)  In the year ............. the Government of India established  a separate 
Ministry to augment the rights of minorities in the country.
A. 2000
B. 2006
C. 2005
D. 2004
(D)
(D)
(B)
91
In spite of the guarantee of human rights to mankind by the international 
community, at times, due to technical-legal aspects, socio, economic, cultural and 
other problems, a section of the humanity are at risk and are unable to enjoy the 
guaranteed human rights. This unit examines human rights issues relating to such 
special category of vulnerable groups, stateless persons, sex workers, migrants and 
persons affected or infected by HIV/AIDS will be subtly discussed .
A) 
1. Stateless persons
Citizenship is man’s basic right for it is nothing less than the Right to have 
rights           - Chief Justice Warren
2. Concept of Nationality and Citizenship
STATELESS PERSONS
In accordance with the established norms of international law, i.e., both 
customary and general principles, Nationality is an important aspect for an 
individual to secure the rights and privileges 
through the State of nationality that are guaranteed 
under both in international law and municipal law. 
Hence,States have an obligation under 
international law to confer nationality to all the 
subjects residing in its territory in general, or by 
any other means employed by it. This casts a 
responsibility on the States under international law 
to prevent statelessness.  However, due to an array of reasons, millions of people 
across the globe are stateless. 
The term “nationality” in international law is often used as a synonym for 
“citizenship” in municipal law, though they are conceptually different. In general, 
nationality signifies a person’s membership to a State.  Citizenship, on the other 
hand, denotes the municipal status of a person possessing the highest category of 
political rights and duties established by law of the land. In view of the difference that 
exists between the two, Goveny had observed that, all citizens are national of a 
particular State, but all nationals may not be the citizens of a State. However, both the 
Unit-IVHuman Rights of Special Category of
Vulnerable Groups
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
92
terms are used interchangeably many a times in several countries including India.
       In general, a state may employ two principles to confer citizenship.  They are; 
Jus Soli ( territory of birth), which means, to regard all persons as its nationals who 
are born in its territory regardless of parentage, and the other is; Jus Sanguinis 
(parentage) which means, all children of its nationals, wherever born, as themselves 
nationals.  However, it is the discretion of a State either to employ one of the 
principles or both, or to apply a very different test prescribing the conditions to grant 
Citizenship.
Apart from both the methods, nationality or citizenship of a country may be 
obtained either through naturalization, registration, or by application or by residence 
in the territory of that country for a particular length of period as per the law of each 
country.    
 Citizenship is the dominant factor to decide the concept of nationality.  If a 
person lacks the dominant legal relationship with a state either internally or 
externally through the tag of citizenship, such a person is referred to as “Stateless 
Person”. Stateless persons are potential target groups for the abuse of their human 
rights in any country, because they posses very few legal rights compared to that of 
citizens of a state.
 According to the 1954 UN Convention on Status of Stateless Persons, stateless 
person means, “A person who is not considered as a national by any State under the 
Operation of its Law.” (Article 1). However, the following do come within the 
purview of the above definition. They are;
Refugees who are under the protection of United Nations High Commissioner for 
Refugees(UNHCR); 
Persons who have committed a crime against peace; 
War criminals, 
Persons who have committed a crime against humanity; 
Persons whose acts are contrary to the purposes and principles of the United 
3. Concept and Causes of Statelessness
l
l
l
l
l
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
Nations and ;
Persons who commit a serious non-political crime outside the country of their 
residence 
Statelessness normally arises in two ways. One is defacto ( temporary) where 
in a person is unable to either establish citizenship, or to be considered a national by 
any state under operation of a state’s law temporarily. defacto (Permanent) 
statelessness may arise when a person fails according to the law of a state to acquire 
nationality by birth.  defacto statelessness encompasses what is known as 
‘subsequent” or “relative” statelessness, where by an individual loses their 
nationality without acquiring another.  
Statelessness is a serious impediment for anybody. It normally denies various 
basic rights that a person cannot enjoy as compared to that of a citizen of a State.  
Such persons cannot move freely across borders of states because they cannot obtain 
passports or visas. They cannot participate in the political process of any country and 
usually lack the political, legal, physical, social, cultural, or diplomatic protection.  
Though their status may not be comparable to that of refugees, they are still prone to 
the legal and humanitarian problems similar to that of refugees.  
A person may be stateless knowingly or unknowingly or without his or her 
fault.  The most Common causes in which a person may become stateless are:
A person may become stateless due to Jus 
Sanguinis i.e. Nationality granted by descent in a country in which an individual is 
born and Jus Soli i.e. When citizenship is granted based on the State in which the 
parents of the individual hold nationality.  
Individuals may be stateless because 
of state succession. (State Succession means the birth or death of states, or creation of 
new states from the existing ones; for example, the creation of Pakistan from India 
during the time of Independence.) In such situations if a new state adopts a new set of 
laws or procedures contrary to customary or general principles of international law, 
the subjects residing in its territory at the date of succession may become stateless 
due to the legal technicalities adopted by the new state. 
The Citizenship laws of some states 
l
Conflict of Laws between States : 
Legal Transfer of territory or Sovereignty : 
Loss of Citizenship due to marriage Laws :  
93
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
94
may provide for automatic loss of nationality for women marrying a foreign national.  
At times even men may be temporarily stateless, if they marry a foreign woman, and 
choose to acquire the nationality of that of the wife.  
 Many a times the numerous administrative and 
procedural requirements of a State can create statelessness.  For example in a state 
where lot of procedural aspects or high amount of fees or lack of compliance with 
laws governing with respect to information, on births and identity may result in 
statelessness.
Although the nationality laws of many countries rest 
on jus sanguinis or jus soli, at times if a particular state is in strict adherence of jus 
sanguinis, it has the potential to produce statelessness.
If a person voluntarily or by compulsion of the law of a state 
renounces the citizenship of a state before acquiring the citizenship of another state, 
he/she become stateless persons.
Automatic loss of citizenship by operation of Law: Statelessness may result due to 
the practice of states which provides for the automatic loss of citizenship after a set 
period of absence from the state or residence abroad.
          According to available estimates by the UNHCR there are an estimated 12 to 
17 million stateless people that are residing in almost all regions in the world. 
Nationality has an important bearing on an individual’s legal capacity in both 
domestic and international law as it effectively provides the 
link between an individual and a state. Hence, statelessness is 
a problem of identity under law, which ultimately deprives 
the enjoyment of legal rights conferred by law upon 
individuals.  In order to protect the interests of the individuals 
and to eliminate statelessness, a number of legal standards 
and instruments have been adopted under international law. 
Article 15 of the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights provides that all persons have a right to nationality and 
Administrative Modulations :
Application of Jus Sanguinis : 
Renunciation : 
4.  Statelessness and International Legal Standards:

HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
95
that no person shall be arbitrarily deprived of one’s nationality or forced to change 
nationality. In order to discharge this commitment, in 1954, the UN adopted the 
 Parties to the Convention need to observe and respect the minimum standards 
in the protection and promotion of human rights of the stateless persons residing in its 
country without discrimination based on race, religion, sex, or country of origin. 
According to the Convection, a Stateless person is entitled to a number of rights and 
protection in the territory of residence. Accordingly the most important once are:
They have freedom to practice their religious ceremonies and religious education 
to their children.  
They should be accorded same treatment on par with their citizens in various 
matters.
No adverse legal effect or treatment to them in various matters in the exercise of 
their fundamental human rights, especially with respect to acquisition of movable 
and immovable property including that of their Intellectual Property Rights.  
They need to be permitted to get access to the Law and Justice Machinery of the 
country.
They need to be given equal treatment in matters of employment, wages, and 
social security on the same lines that are applicable to the citizens of a country.  
They need to be provided with travel documents to travel to foreign countries as 
per the provisions of law.
They should not be expelled in a discriminatory fashion or to be sent to another 
country against their wish where in their security is in jeopardize their human rights. 
Although, the Convention specifies a number of rights and benefits to 
stateless persons, it has not provided any mechanism to protect the expulsion or 
return to countries of expulsion of these people by the country in which they reside.
In order to strengthen the international commitment to eliminate the concept 
of statelessness in the year 1961, the UN adopted another convention on the
convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons, which came into force in 
1969. 
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
96
 Reduction of Statelessness, which came into force in 1975.  As its name suggests, the 
main aim of the Convention is to reduce statelessness. The convention presented 
more scope to the contracting states in order to facilitate the states to expand the 
methods of nationality, beyond the purview of jus soli and jus sanguinis. The 
Convention followed the path of the 1930 Convention on the Conflict of Nationality 
Laws of the League of Nations in order to avoid the conflict of laws with respect to 
marriage and birth of children. However, the Convention does not impose a blanket 
responsibility on a contracting state to extend its nationality to any stateless person.  
But, at the same time, it has extended the scope to confer nationality on ties held with 
the state on any genuine link that the national possess with that particular State.
 In spite of adoption of the convention guaranteeing the rights of stateless 
persons, these persons often face a number of difficulties in the free exercise of their 
human rights in the country of residence. They are:
The stateless persons are often unable to obtain identity documents; International 
travel becomes almost impossible if one cannot obtain a passport or other travel 
document. As a result, some stateless people are  regarded as illegal immigrants 
wherever they reside and face legal action by the country of residence. 
Denial of Minority status even if  stateless persons fall within the category of 
minorities according to the law of the country of their residence.
Children born in the territory of residence may face adverse effects in obtaining 
Birth Registration Certificates.
Discriminatory treatment in various free exercise of their rights especially with 
respect to matters of education, health, acquisition of property, and to receive social 
security benefits. 
There is every possibility for the abuse of their rights by the law enforcing 
agencies on flimsy grounds. 
lThere will be always tension and unrest in their lives with the fear of their 
displacement from the country of residence to another country, lack of stability etc.
4. Consequences of Statelessness on Human Rights:
l
l
l
l
l
The moment stateless persons secure the citizenship or nationality of a country; they 
seize to be stateless, and are regarded as nationals of that particular country. Once 
they obtain the nationality of a country, they are able to exercise their rights freely on 
par with other nationals of that country.  
The  has identified the 
following  challenges:
Statelessness has still not been comprehensively mapped worldwide and many 
stateless populations lack the identification documents (or entitlements) that would 
allow this to be corrected.
Many nationality laws fail to include safeguards against statelessness, or contain 
discriminatory provisions causing statelessness among particular groups 
Very few procedures are laid down for determining the stateless status of a person 
and where procedures are laid down, the safeguards to protect the rights of the 
individuals are inadequate.  
Low public awareness of statelessness has resulted in a low level of concrete 
responses to situations of statelessness and the concerns of stateless people 
The UNHCR through its continuous efforts is working hard to convince the 
states to  become parties to  both the conventions  in order to augment the rights of 
the stateless persons. The UNHCR calls upon States to adopt nationality legislation  
with a view to reduce statelessness, consistent with the fundamental principles of 
international law, in particular by preventing arbitrary deprivation of nationality and 
by eliminating provisions which permit the renunciation of nationality without the 
prior possession or acquisition of another nationality.
Apart from the efforts of the UN and its organs, it is the duty of the nation-
states to prevent statelessness as per the general principles of international law and 
the numerous international treaties, conventions or covenants on human rights which 
impose a direct and indirect obligation not to deprive the free exercise of life and 
liberty of any individual.  
6.  Some current challenges 
UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
l
l
l
l
4.  Sum UP
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
97
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
(B) SEX WORKERS
1.  Definition of Sex Work
According to the Preamble of the UN Convention for the Suppression of 
the Traffic in the persons and the Exploitation of the Prostitution of others, 
1949; 
2.  Sex Workers and International Efforts
l
“Prostitution and the accompanying evils of trafficking of persons for the 
purpose of prostitution are incompatible with the dignity and worth of the human 
person and endanger the welfare of the individual, the family, and the community.”
From ancient to modern times, Prostitution or Sex Work has been in 
existence in one form or the other. It has been prevalent in all societies and states 
across the World in almost all periods.   It is one of the worst forms of violation of 
rights of women and girls.  In spite of the evil affects that are associated with sex 
work, in the contemporary era of globalization it has assumed different dimension 
and included many types of activities that form part of sex work. Though there are 
instances of men performing sex work for a variety of reasons, the number is 
comparatively less to that of the women and girls.  
The term sex worker is a broad term and covers a number of sexual services. 
Traditionally, the sex workers were referred to by a number of names in each society 
such as whore, prostitute, harlot etc. However, these terms are very derogatory in 
nature. Therefore, in 1978, an activist by the name of Carol Leigh coined the term 
‘sex worker’. From then onwards, it became a popular term and gained currency in 
referring to various types of services that are in existence in the sex industry. 
Because of the social reform 
movement of the 19th century throughout the 
world, the international community adopted a 
number of international agreements in order 
to eradicate the illegal acts that were targeting 
women. They are :
An International Agreement on Suppression of the White Slave Traffic came into 
98

HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
existence in 1904. The United Nations in 1948 amended this agreement  in order to 
cover all types of traffic of human beings.
International Agreement for the Suppression of the White Slave Traffic in 1910.
The League of Nations adopted an International Convention in 1921 for the 
Suppression of the Traffic in Women and Children. This was approved by the United 
Nations in the year 1947 through a Protocol.
International Convention in 1933 for the Suppression of the Traffic in Women of 
Full Age  
The efforts of the international community and the League of Nations led the 
United Nations, to adopt a convention for the 
 The Convention contains 
28 articles. These articles empowers the national Governments to enact specific 
legislations to eradicate the evil of prostitution and other aspects relating  to it and 
declare any activity that affects the modesty, dignity, life and liberty of a person 
especially that of women and children.      
Apart from these Conventions, the 
 the World Conference on Human Rights 
1993 and a number of international forums condemned violence in any form against 
women and urged the nation-states to eradicate all the evils associated with 
prostitution and other related aspects. These efforts of the International Community, 
led many countries to enact specific legislations to prevent trafficking and even to 
ban sex work in some countries. 
l
l
l
Suppression of Traffic in Persons 
and of the Exploitation of Prostitution and Others 1949.
Convention on the Elimination of 
Discrimination Against Women, 1979,
99

A number of International Organizations, such as the Economic and Social 
Council, International Labor Organization, United Nations Scientific, Education and 
Cultural Organization  (UNESCO) , the International Human Rights Council etc., 
are working closely with the nation-states and these organisations have adopted a 
number of resolutions to eradicate all types of evils that are associated with sex work 
and to uphold the rights of these people.
In India, prostitution has been prevalent since ancient periods. Among the 
various works, the work of Arthasastra of Kautiyala comprehensively dealt with the 
position of prostitutes in the ancient periods. In ancient India, for the word prostitute, 
nearly 250 synonyms were employed. Among all the words, the word Ganika 
received a wide spread recognition. In the ancient India, Prostitution was recognised 
officially as an economic activity and these women were paid by the State.  In their 
old age, they were taken care of by the State and pensions were also paid by the State.  
In the middle ages, the profession was named after a traditional customary 
name called devadasi (Temple Servant) which was widely prevalent in many parts of 
the country. During the Muslim reign, prostitutes were recognized as dancing and 
singing girls. The initiation of legal measures to regulate sex work and its 
eradication, during the British period, could not bring about the desired results. 
After independence, the Government of India and the State Governments 
have taken a number of steps to eradicate prostitution and the evils associated with it. 
In 1956, the Government of India enacted the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in 
Women and Girls Act. This Act was extensively amended in 1986 and renamed as the 
Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act 1956 based on the Recommendations of the 
National Law Commission of India.  Though the Act empowers the various organs of 
the state, especially the police to curb the menaces associated with the profession of 
prostitution in any form, nowhere the profession of sex work or prostitution is 
explicitly banned nor officially recognized.  
Apart from the above, the Government constituted the National Commission 
of Women, 1990 to study the issue relating to women and to suggest the remedies to 
eradicate all the evils and inimical activities targeting the modesty of women. The 
National Human Rights Commission also undertook a number of studies and 
3. Indian Scenario
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
100
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
suggested various measures to prevent prostitution.
 The Government of India along with the State Governments constituted a 
number of committees based on the Judgment of the Supreme Court of India in 1997 
in Gaurav Jain  V Union of India (AIR 1990 SC) to protect the prostitutes and their 
children.   In spite of the best efforts of the state, prostitution is rampant in India for a 
variety of reasons.  Among the various reasons, poverty, social customs, blind beliefs 
existing in villages, bad company, massive urbanization, misuse of science and 
technology are some of the reasons for the widespread increase of the number of 
women and children entering into the flesh trade against their will.  Considering the 
magnitude of the problem, a number of social activist organization and sex workers 
organisations are demanding that the state recognize and protect the rights of these 
people.  
In a number of cases, the courts admonished the law enforcing authorities for 
excesses in dealing with sex workers. In Vishal Jeet V Union of India in 1990, the 
Supreme Court of India laid down a number of stiff norms and directed the Union and 
the States to submit detailed reports in protecting the rights and the rehabilitation 
activities employed by the state. In Budhadev Karmskar V State of West Bengal in 
2011, it had passed a number of directions to protect the rights of sex workers, 
including their rehabilitation.  
In spite of the judicial proclamations, efforts of the state and its agencies to 
eradicate the evils associated with the profession could not yield the desired results. 
The strict vigil and participation of society alone could augment the rights of these 
destitute women and children to eradicate the evil and the stigma attached to them
Migrant workers means, people who move from one country to another in 
search of  work.  However, the term migrant worker has different meanings and  is 
linked to different situations in various parts of the world. At the same time, people 
who are employed by official means by any government or international 
organization cannot be considered as migrant workers.  Industrialization along the 
growing pace of economic globalization, poverty, and social conditions has led to the 
4. Sum Up
( C) MIGRANT WORKERS 101
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
102
increase of Migrant workers. According to available estimates, there are about 214 
million migrant workers in the world. Out of these around 25% of them, do not 
possess any kind of status.
Whenever a person migrates, human rights of these persons could be  
affected in many ways. Among them, the irregular migrant’s workers face severe 
adverse circumstances while exercising of their human rights. To augment their 
rights, the International Labour Organisation adopted a number of legal instruments 
to guarantee the rights of these persons. Among the various documents, Migrant 
Workers(Supplementary 
Provisions) Convention, 1975, 
is an important document. 
A c c o r d i n g  t o  t h e  
convention,it is the basic 
obligation of nation-states to 
provide opportunities to migrant 
workers and to protect their 
rights. The Convention imposes 
an obligation on the states parties 
to provide equal opportunity and 
treatment in matters relating to employment, social security and other cultural rights. 
This also ensures that state is under a legal obligation to protect and enhance the 
rights of the workers families and to provide all the individual freedoms that lawfully 
need to be exercised by its nationals.  
The United Nations in 1990 adopted an International Convention on the 
Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and their Families. The 
Convention came into existence in 2003. The Convention has 93 articles. The 
Convention has not advocated any special rights. It puts an obligation upon state 
parties to take care of all the human rights that are guaranteed in an array of 
international agreements, to which already states are parties. It urges the member 
states to protect and  guarantee the rights of these people to treat these people on par 
with their own nationals. 
1.  International Efforts

HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
103
2. Migrant Workers in India
3. Sum up
 In Indian context, the definition of migrant workers needs to be differently 
construed from that of the International definition. Accordingly, migrant workers, 
include non-nationals who move from other countries to India, or citizens who move 
from one state to another to seek work. In India, migration has taken place, especially 
after the rapid urbanization and economic liberalization. Many people move to cities 
and neighboring states wherever there are chances for work.In India after 
agriculture, migrants are predominantly found in the construction industry.  
Although these people possess all the rights as citizens, they may not have certain 
benefits such as residential benefits that are available to the people of the state or may 
not be able to procure ration cards under the Public Distribution system to purchase 
their food grains at a subsidized price supplied by the State in which they currently 
reside. 
In order to improve the conditions of these workers, the Government of India 
passed the Inter-State Migrant Workers (Regulation of Employment and Condition 
of Service) Act in 1979. Based on the provisions of the Act a number of State 
Governments too enacted separate legislations to prevent discriminatory practices 
against these workers. However, due to a number of reasons, many a times these 
workers are denied a number of rights that are legally eligible to claim. 
The Supreme Court of India in Bachapan Bacho Andolan v Union India in 
2011, while addressing the rights of the children of various sections of people in the 
country, directed the executive to take necessary steps in order to protect the rights of 
children of migrant workers and their families.  In People’s Union for Democratic 
Rights and others v. Union of India, in 1982, emphasizing the role of the State in 
the protection of the rights of the workers under various laws of the country including 
the constitution, the court in no uncertain terms expressed its displeasure about the 
negligence of the state in preventing the violations with respect to the payment of 
wages to the workers and forceful employment of workers in the Asiad Project. It 
accordingly held that it is the duty of the state to prevent any such violations and to 
prevent any kind of forced migrations against the wishes of any person.  
Whatever the reason for which a person migrates from one place to another either 
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
within the country or outside the country in search of work, they cannot be ill-treated 
on any count.  According to human rights, every person has a right to live, reside and 
work in any avocation of his/her choice. Hence, the efforts of the international 
community and the states need to be supported by every individual of who has a duty 
to protect the rights of their fellow men irrespective of their working nature. Then 
only the efforts of law will yield the results in protecting the rights of these migrant 
workers. 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus/ Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome 
is a serious disease discovered in 1981.   As of date, no definite cure has been found. 
However, efforts are on to invent a cure for this disease.  According to UN the 
diseases affect more than 60 million people. In this around, and 50% of people 
affected by the disease have lost their lives, around 36 million people in the world are 
living  suffering from HIV/AIDS. The disease normally contracted through unsafe 
sexual relations and other means such as unsafe blood transfusion etc. Taking into 
consideration of the magnitude of the disease and its effect on the human rights of 
these people, a number of human rights organisations started their work in this area 
since 1981. 
The United Nations in order to prevent discrimination shown towards the 
HIV/AIDS patients across the world, adopted a number of declarations and started 
working through a number of its specialized agencies. Among the various organs, the 
World Heal Organisation is the most important one that has undertaken a number of 
efforts to help these victims. Accordingly, in order to promote their rights and to 
create awareness among various sections of people across the world, it has declared 
December 1, 1988 as  World  AIDS Day. 
The Economic and Social Council considering the work of various 
organisations to provide a unitary mechanism for better coordination between them, 
through a resolution in 1994 recommended to the General Assembly to establish a 
specialized agency to chalk out strategies to tackle the menace of AIDS in an 
effective manner. Based on this recommendation, the UN in 1996 adopted the 
UNAIDS, a Joint Programme to coordinate the activities of various organs working 
( D) HIV/AIDS VICTIMS 
1.  International Efforts:
104
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
in this area. Since then UN AIDS adopted a Number of Strategic plans to tackle the 
dreaded disease.     
 To extend support to the activities of the UNAIDS, in a special session in 
2001 on HIV/AIDS was conducted by the General Assembly, in which Member 
States of the UN, agreed to submit periodic reports on the various activities 
undertaken by each country to tackle the disease and to improve the situation of the 
affected people in these countries. In the year 2000, the UN recognised the disease 
and placed it as one of the Millennium Goals of the UN to control the problem and to 
protect the rights of these people. 
Taking into consideration of the magnitude of the problem, for the first time, 
the Security Council adopted a resolution in 2000 to limit the potentially damaging 
impact of HIV on the health of Uniformed Services Personnel in peacekeeping 
operations. In 2011, through another resolution, it reaffirmed its commitment to 
address the issue and requested the 
member states to increase their efforts in 
controlling the diseases in conflict and 
post conflict situations.
The UN AIDS in order to 
discharge its duties and to achieve the 
millennium goal to eradicate the disease 
has adopted a plan of Action in 2010. This 
popularly referred  to as the UN AIDS 
Strategic goals plan for 2015. The goals 
are as follows:
To reduce sexual transmission of HIV by half, including among young people, 
men who have sex with men and transmission in the context of sex work.  
To eliminate vertical transmission of HIV, and AIDS-related maternal mortality 
reduced by half. 
To prevent all new HIV infections among people who use drugs. 
Universal access to antiretroviral therapy for people living with HIV. 
l
l
l
l
105

HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
l
l
l
l
l
l
2. Human Rights Violations Faced by HIV/AIDS People
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
To reduce TB deaths among people living with HIV by half.
To oversee that people living with HIV and households affected by HIV are 
addressed in all national social protection strategies and to have access to essential 
care and support. 
Countries with punitive laws and practices around HIV transmission, sex work, 
drug use or homosexuality that block effective responses to be reduced by half. 
HIV-related restrictions on entry, stay and residence to be eliminated in half of 
the countries that have such restrictions. 
To see to it that HIV-specific needs of women and girls are addressed in at least 
half of all national HIV responses. 
Zero tolerance for gender-based violence.
People living with HIV/AIDS face a number of serious violations in the free 
exercise of their human rights. Among the various rights, a few are stated below.
Denial of Health Care and Treatment
Denial of and/or Removal from 
Employment
Lack of Access to Information
Lack of Access to Legal Remedies
Lack of Strong Support System 
including family, spouses, friends and 
relatives.
Discrimination against those children 
whose parents are  suffering from the above disease in various matters including 
education 
Denial of number of services in the society etc.  
106

HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
3.  National Scenario :
n
n
n
4.  Sum up
In India the first case of  HIV/AIDS victim was found in 1986. According to 
Family Health Survey III, 2006,   of the Government of India, around  two to three 
million people are affected by the disease . In the national average, people living in 
the urban areas are more in number suffering with the disease compared to that of 
rural population.  The Government of India even before the increase of the patients 
suffering from this chronic disease as a preventive care, in the year 1987 launched the 
National AIDS Control Programme. Accordingly the objectives of the programme 
are:
Covered Surveillance
Blood Screening
Health Education
However, considering the increase in the rate of infection among the 
populace of the country, in 1992  National AIDS Control Organisation. The aims of 
the organisation are to oversee the formulation of policies by various states and the 
Government of India, Prevention work and control programme in combating the 
HIV/AIDS. Apart from the organisation, the National Institute of Health and Family 
Welfare has also been entrusted to evolve suitable policy formulations at regular 
intervals to tackle the dreaded disease.  
The subtle examination of the rights of HIV/AIDS affected persons brings 
the point to the fore that these people too possess human rights and their free exercise 
like any other normal individual. The society and the international community need 
to provide opportunities for these people to lead a life with dignity, instead of living at 
the mercy of others.
107
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
Conclusion
The brief over view of the rights of various vulnerable groups or 
disadvantaged people, amply presents the special categories of problems that affect 
their free exercise of human rights guaranteed both by international and national 
laws. A cryptic examination provided in the various units, certainly imposes a 
responsibility on each one of us to protect the rights of everyone without any 
discrimination based on sex, race, language, religion, caste or any other type of 
discrimination.
Accordingly, we the people of the United Nations have a solemn 
responsibility to pledge ourselves to promote the ideal of Dr. B.R. Ambedkar that 
social democracy alone could distance all the evils that exist in the contemporary 
world, compared to that of political or legal democracy.
The Strict adherence to social democracy would certainly lead us to achieve 
the path shown by international law of human rights to establish a World free from 
discrimination of any kind towards the fellow men. 
108
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
109
        UNIT-IV MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS                            Answers
1)  The term 'Nationality' in International Law is often used as a synonym 
for "......."in Municipal Law, though they conceptually different.
A. Citizenship
B. Regionalist
C. Ethnicity
D. Statelessness
2)  The most common causes in which a person may become stateless.......
A. Conflict of laws between states.
B. Legal transfer of territory or sovereignty
C. renunciation
D. All of the above
3)  UN adopted The Convention relating to the Status of 
Stateless Persons-1954, came in to force in........... ,
A. 1955 
B. 1969 
C. 1989 
D. 1999
4)  Which of the following is the international agreement in 
order to eradicate the illegal acts that were targeted to women?
A. International agreement for suppression of the White Slave Traffic in 1910.
B. International convention for the suppression of the Traffic in Women and 
Children- 1921 
C. Suppression of traffic in persons and the exploitation of prostitution and 
other  persons 1949 
D. All of the above 
(A)
(D)
(B)
(D)
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
5)  Which is the famous case under Indian Supreme Court, 
which directed the executives to take necessary steps in 
order to protect the rights of the children of migrant 
workers and their families?
A. Vishaka V. State of Rajasthan
B.  Bachpan Bachao Andolan V. Union of India
C. Kesavananda Bharati V. State of Kerala
D. None of the above.
1. Prof. Y.S.R. Murthy , “HUMAN RIGHTS HANDBOOK” by Lexis Nexis Butterworth in 
October, 2007
2. Dr. V.T. Patil and Prof. Dr. T.S.N. Sastry, “STUDIES IN HUMAN RIGHTS” by PonRani 
Publications, Delhi, January 2000. 
3. Prof. Dr. T.S.N. Sastry, “INDIA AND HUMAN RIGHTS REFLECTIONS” by Concept 
Publishing Company, New Delhi, 2005. 
4. “WOMEN AND HUMAN RIGHT” by Indian Institute of Human Rights, 2001.
5. Surinder Khanna, “DALIT WOMEN AND HUMAN RIGHTS” by Swastik Publications 
Delhi, ISBN: 93-80138-36-7,  2011. 
6. “CHILD AND HUMAN RIGHTS” by Indian Institute of Human Rights, 2001. 
7. “INDIAN CONSTITUTION AND HUMAN RIGHTS “by Indian Institute of Human Rights, 
2001.
8. “REFUGEE LAWS AND UNHCR” by Indian Institute of Human Rights, 2001. 
9. “STATE OF HUMAN RIGHTS IN INDIA” by Indian Institute of Human Rights, 2001. 
10. “PEOPLE'S RIGHTS : SOCIAL MOVEMENTS AND THE STATE IN THE THIRD 
WORLD” Ed by Manoranjan Mohanty, Partha Nath Mukherji and Olle Tornquist, Sage, New 
Delhi, 1998.
11. See the reports of National Human Rights Commission of India, NHRC, http://nhrc.nic.in
12. “UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS (ILLUSTRATED)”, by United 
Nations, United Nations Office in Geneva, (also available in French), ISBN 13: 
9789211014921, Sales Number: GV.08.0.2, October 2008.
13.   “TRAFFICKING IN HUMANS: SOCIAL, CULTURAL AND POLITICAL DIMENSIONS” 
by United Nations University , ISBN 13: 9789280811469, Sales Number: 08.III.A.2, 
February, 2008
(B)
SUGGESTIVE READING MATERIALS 
110
lB.D. Sharma, Rights of Tribals, Journal of the NHRC, Vol. 1, 2002, 79-132
lChandrima Chatterjee and Gunjan Sheoran: Vulnerable Groups in India, 
Centre for Enquiry into Health and Allied Themes, 2007, Mumbai
lDeng, Francis. "The guiding principles on internal displacement". 
E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.l, February 11. New York, NY: United Nations.
lDouglas Brownidge: The Violence Against Women: Vulnerable Populations, 
Routledge, 2009
lEU quality Assurances in vocational and educational training: available at 
http://www.eqavet.eu/qa/gns/glossary/v/vulnerable-group.aspx
lHuman rights and Vulnerable Groups available at    
http://www.sagepub.com/upm-data/11973_Chapter_5.pdf
lInformation note: Protect the human rights of all migrants, OHCHR.
lJohannes Hoogeveen;Emil Tesliuc and Renos Vakis: A Guide to the Analysis 
of Risk, Vulnerability and Vulnerable Groups; available at 
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTSRM/Publications/20316319/RVA.pdf
lJustice Iyer, Krishna, Social Justice –Sunset or Dawn, 15-16 (1980) E.B.C. , 
Lucknow
lLoenen, T., ‘Indirect discrimination: oscillating between containment and 
revolution’, Non-discrimination law: comparative perspectives, T. Loenen and P. 
Rodrigues (eds.), Martinus Nijhoff, 1999,.
 McCrudden, C., ‘Changing notions of discrimination’, Equality and 
discrimination: essays in freedom and justice, S. Guest and A. Milne (eds.), Franz 
Steiner Verlag Wiesbaden GMBH, 1985, 
lManjima Bhattacharjya , Sex workers as economic agents, Info Change News 
& Features, October 2008
lManjimaBhattacharjya, Sex workers as economic agents, InfoChange News & 
Features, October 2008
lMary Larkin: Vulnerable Groups in Health and Social Care, Sage, 2009
lJeffery F Addicott et. Al., (Eds) Globalization, Interntional  Law and Human 
Rights, Oxford 2012
lNationality and Statelessness, A Handbook for Parliamentarians, Published by 
the Inter-Parliamentary Union with the United Nations High Commissioner for 
Refugees, 2005
111
REFERENCES
lNationality and Statelessness, A Handbook for Parliamentarians, Published by 
the Inter-Parliamentary Union with the United Nations High Commissioner for 
Refugees, 2005
lOishik Sircar, Even if we start now, we have much to do for sex workers: 
Vocational training is fine, but sex workers have been fighting for rights, Tehelka, 
Opinion, 16 February 2011.
lP.K. Pandey (Ed) Human Rights , APH Publishing Corporation, 2012 
lRam Kishore Chppudhury and Tapash Ghan Choudhury: Judicial Reflections 
of Justice Bhagwati, Eastern Law House, 2008
lSterbach L. Juridical Studies in Ancient Indian Law (Part 1) 1956 pp 197.270 
lSteven E. Mayer, "what is disadvantaged groups ?" (2003) 
www.effectivecommunities.com
lSubirBhaumik, Calcutta India sex workers demand rights, BBC News.
lSubirBhaumik, CalcuttaIndia sex workers demand rights, BBC News.
lSusan Timberlake: UNAIDS:  Human Rights, Ethics, and Law; Health and 
Human Rights, Vol.3. No.1 1996 available at http://www.hhrjournal.org/archives-
pdf/4065286.pdf.bannered.pdf
lTSN Sastry   Sex Workers and Human Rights: Indian Scenario in the 
Proceeding the ISIL of the International Conference 2001, Vol II pp 526-538)
lTSN Sastry ( Ed) India and Human Rights Reflections, Concept Publishing 
Company, New Delhi, 2005.
lVT Patil and TSN Sastry ( Ed)  Studies in Human Rights, PR Publications 
New Delhi,2000
lTSN Sastry Human Rights and Minorities –An International Perspective: 
Indian Journal of Law and Justice, Vol. 2, 2010, pp 1-5 
lUniversity for Peace: Human Rights Law;  2004
lTurner Bryan S.: Vulnerability and Human Rights: 2006, The Pennsylvania 
University Press
lGOI, Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner, India, Census 
2011http://censusindia.gov.in/.
lhttp://childrensrightsportal.org/fundamental-rights/freedom
lhttp://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carol_Leigh
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
112
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
lhttp://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HIV/AIDS
lhttp://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sex_workerhttp://action.web.ca/home/catw/readi
ngroom.shtml?cat_name=Resolutions;http://www.ruhama.ie/easyedit/files/5.Prost
itution%2520as%2520a%2520violation%2520of%2520human%2520 
lhttp://www.eqavet.eu/qa/gns/glossary/v/vulnerable-group.aspx
lhttp://www.erces.com/journal/articles/archives/volume3/v02/v03.htm
lhttp://www.google.co.in/imgres?q=cedaw+convention&hl=en&biw=1600&bi
h=799&gbv=2&tbm=isch&tbnid=Q_uOSlzIaX75BM:&imgrefurl=http://feminist
campus.blogspot.com/2010/06/women-deliver-conference-and-
cedaw.html&docid=lZLFty8plEPqTM&imgurl=http://1.bp.blogspot.com/_nvPOy
6WfpHc/TA__l8a4cbI/AAAAAAAAAAU/QUrBG9YHWI4/s1600/cedaw_blog_
cc.jpg&w=350&h=500&ei=Rf_kT4G8GMjWrQexhOCBCQ&zoom=1
lhttp://www.google.co.in/imgres?q=internally+displaced+persons+in+india&h
l=en&biw=1280&bih=923&tbm=isch&tbnid=YarwOSOUfoXNgM:&imgrefu
rl=http://transcurrents.com/tc/2009/05/un_calls_for_faster_screening.html&do
cid=5zk9hQqPSS-
YHM&imgurl=http://transcurrents.com/tc/IRIN12014.jpg&w=600&h=446&e
i=9JniT66UKYOzrAebhKmYAw&zoom=1&iact=hc&vpx=723&vpy=448&d
ur=4143&hovh=193&hovw=260&tx=110&ty=124&sig=1147034384315566
95191&page=1&tbnh=135&tbnw=179&start=0&ndsp=30&ved=1t:429,r:15,s
:0,i:117
lhttp://www.google.co.in/imgres?q=internally+displaced+persons+in+india& 
l=en&biw=1280&bih=923&tbm=isch&tbnid=7E_8QVeOHTxbvM:&imgrefu
rl=http://revolutionaryfrontlines.wordpress.com/category/south-
asia/india/andhra-
pradesh/page/2/&docid=WkygfLVwx3uJOM&imgurl=http://southasiarev.files
.wordpress.com/2009/12/india-idps-in-
ap2.jpg&w=300&h=250&ei=9JniT66UKYOzrAebhKmYAw&zoom=1&iact=
hc&vpx=606&vpy=610&dur=3553&hovh=200&hovw=240&tx=146&ty=118
&sig=114703438431556695191&page=2&tbnh=153&tbnw=183&start=30&
ndsp=25&ved=1t:429,r:7,s:30,i:189
lhttp://www.google.co.in/imgres?q=sex+worker+images&hl=en&sa=X&biw=
1600&bih=799&tbm=isch&prmd=imvns&tbnid=rHuAgGxS0qqTAM:&imgr
efurl=http://cchronicle.com/2011/03/selling-sex-how-abolitionist-feminists-
are-hurting-sex-workers/&imgurl=http://cchronicle.com/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/sex-workers-
113
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
rights.jpg&w=500&h=333&ei=T5w_ULzXM4qyrAeD9oCQBw&zoom=1&ia
ct=rc&dur=478&sig=105184705715703869100&page=1&tbnh=136&tbnw=1
89&start=0&ndsp=30&ved=1t:429,r:23,s:0,i:145&tx=70&ty=102
lhttp://www.google.co.in/imgres?q=stateless+persons&start=105&hl=en&sa=
X&biw=1280&bih=923&tbm=isch&prmd=imvns&tbnid=DcOP-
GfXzg8q4M:&imgrefurl=http://activistnews.blogspot.com/2011/08/invisible-
millions-pay-price-of.html&docid=XzyFZrYH5H6JIM&imgurl=http://delany-
making-a-
difference.wikispaces.com/file/view/refugees4.jpg/106834719/refugees4.jpg&
w=300&h=355&ei=TJ_iT7XNPNCxrAelrMW2Aw&zoom=1&iact=hc&vpx=
429&vpy=533&dur=5182&hovh=244&hovw=206&tx=76&ty=120&sig=114
703438431556695191&page=5&tbnh=171&tbnw=144&ndsp=25&ved=1t:42
9,r:11,s:105,i:121
lhttp://www.google.co.in/search?hl=en&biw=1600&bih=799&gbv=2&tbm=is
ch&sa=1&q=article+3+of+cedaw&btnG=#hl=en&gbv=2&biw=1600&bih=79
9&tbm=isch&sa=1&q=first+world+conference+on+women&oq=first+world+
conference+on+women&aq=f&aqi=&aql=&gs_l=img.12...0.0.1.7281.0.0.0.0.
0.0.0.0..0.0...0.0.7dZWqjGoz8g&pbx=1&bav=on.2,or.r_gc.r_pw.r_qf.,cf.osb&
fp=a10f8bad2a9d27fd
lhttp://www.google.co.in/search?q=migrant+workers+images&hl=en&site=we
bhp&prmd=imvns&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ei=Wsr5T4LTPI
mqrAeDlZ3fBg&ved=0CE8QsAQ&biw=1600&bih=799 
lhttp://www.google.co.in/search?q=stateless+persons+and+UN+Images&hl=en
&prmd=imvns&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ei=doHwT6mBIo6qrAfDrd
G9DQ&ved=0CD8Q_AUoAQ&biw=1600&bih=799
lhttp://www.herstoria.com/discover/eglantynejebb.html
lhttp://www.humanrights.is/the-human-rights-
project/humanrightscasesandmaterials/humanrightsconceptsideasandfora/Undi
rflokkur/refugees/
lhttp://www.ilo.org/global/standards/subjects-covered-by-international-labour-
standards/migrant-workers/lang--en/index.htm
lhttp://www.ilo.org/global/standards/subjects-covered-by-international-labour-
standards/migrant-workers/lang--en/index.htm
lhttp://www.imfmetal.org/files/08102914241866/Migrant_workers_in_India.pd
f
114
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
lhttp://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/HIVAIDSCartoonen.pdf
• http://www.unaids.org/en/aboutunaids/unaidsstrategygoalsby2015/
lhttp://www.unhcr.org/cgi-bin/texis/vtx/home
lhttp://www.unmultimedia.org/s/photo/detail/662/0066207.html
lhttp://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/res3447.htm
lInternational Guidelines on HIV/AIDS and Human Rights 2006 Consolidated 
Version, OHCHR and UNAIDS, July 2006
lKnow your Rights series, Human Rights and HIV/AIDS, National Human 
Rights Commission, see http://nhrc.nic.in
lNational Aids Control Organisation, Know your rights, 
http://www.nacoonline.org/Quick_Links/Know_Your_Rights/
lOHCHR website, Human Rights and HIV/AIDS 
http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/HIV/Pages/HIVIndex.aspx
lOHCHR website, Migration and Human Rights, 
http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Migration/Pages/MigrationAndHumanRights
Index.aspx
lStatelessness, UNHCR website, 
http://www.unhcr.org/pages/49c3646c155.html
lThe Office of  the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) 
Homepage for indigenous people, 
http://www2.ohchr.org/english/issues/indigenous/index.htm
lUN Development Guidelines on Indigenous people, 2008 available at 
http://www2.ohchr.org/english/issues/indigenous/docs/guidelines.pdf
lUn Resolution on Indigenous People 
http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/documents/DRIPS_en.pdf
lUNHCR: Statelessness: An Analytical Framework for Prevention, Reduction 
and Protection 2008  available at http://www.unhcr.org/49a271752.html
lVulnerable Groups 
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTSRM/Publications/20316319/RVA.pdf
lVulnerable Groups: EU Quality Assurance: 
http://www.eqavet.eu/qa/gns/glossary/v/vulnerable-group.aspx
lVulnerable Groups: http://www.sagepub.com/upm-data/11973_Chapter_5.pdf
115
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
lWomen’s Rights http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Women's_rights
lNurture: How indigenous women of South America are fighting the 
...soundsandcolours.com
lThe real Avatar story: indigenous people fight to save their forest homes 
...news.mongabay.com
lThese indigenous tribes' relied upon hunting, gathering, ...brazil-travel-
northeast.com
o Aboriginal people 'sing their country' in ceremony that combines song, 
...aboriginalartstore.com.au
o Government of the UPA Report to the People 2010-11
lThe Community-wise break-up of Minority Population in India, ...nmdfc.org
lSikhs - religious minorities in India (only about 2% of the Indian population). 
http//www. pushpinderbagga.com
o Website of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, http://tribal.nic.in
o Website of the National Commission for Minorities
http://ncm.nic.in/Constitutional_provisions.html
o Concluding observations of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination on India’s Report, CERD/C/IND/CO/19, 
5 May 2007
o NHRC's Statement at the World Conference Against Racism etc. at 
Durban,http://www.nhrc.nic.in
o The National Portal of India 
http://india.gov.in/spotlight/spotlight_archive.php?id=33
o http:// www. Minority affairs.gov.in/vision. mission
lhttp://www.google.co.in/imgres?q=common+photos+of+sexual+minorities&h
l=en&sa=X&biw=1600&bih=756&tbm=isch&prmd=imvnsfd&tbnid=6L_Qm
BKITm5lwM:&imgrefurl=http://vimeo.com/channels/230313/46709778&doc
id=rPaB4UJJVFs6BM&imgurl=http://b.vimeocdn.com/ts/312/915/312915297
_640.jpg&w=640&h=427&ei=pQceUIqLAc-
srAe5r4GQAg&zoom=1&iact=hc&vpx=187&vpy=462&dur=2804&hovh=18
3&hovw=275&tx=117&ty=203&sig=112668249727399636140&page=2&tbn
h=136&tbnw=208&start=34&ndsp=41&ved=1t:429,r:9,s:34,i:209
lhttp://www.google.co.in/imgres?q=statelessness+and+UN&hl=en&sa=X&biw
=1600&bih=799&tbm=isch&prmd=imvns&tbnid=uZlUXZGLJHtZNM:&img
refurl=http://tagheemoas.blogspot.com/2010/12/62-years-of-human-rights-yet-
no-
116
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
rights.html&docid=jx9zh6AVxDaZuM&imgurl=http://3.bp.blogspot.com/_I4f
FYfImCHA/TQFi3HCeoBI/AAAAAAAAAAY/NCKINeeUEog/s1600/UNH
CR.jpg&w=395&h=500&ei=b7oeUI-zJM-
qrAfp6YHYDQ&zoom=1&iact=hc&vpx=344&vpy=328&dur=2262&hovh=2
53&hovw=199&tx=86&ty=133&sig=112709332683318679526&page=2&tbn
h=152&tbnw=120&start=28&ndsp=35&ved=1t:429,r:8,s:28,i:188
lhttp://infochangeindia.org/hiv-aids/hiv-in-india/the-hivaids-scenario-in-
india.html
lsearch.claro-
search.com/?s=img&babsrc=HP_iclro&q=vulnerable+groups+UN+images&st
art=0
lhttp://www.google.co.in/imgres?q=cedaw+convention&hl=en&biw=1600&bi
h=799&gbv=2&tbm=isch&tbnid=Q_uOSlzIaX75BM:&imgrefurl=http://femi
nistcampus.blogspot.com/2010/06/women-deliver-conference-and-
cedaw.html&docid=lZLFty8plEPqTM&imgurl=http://1.bp.blogspot.com/_nv
POy6WfpHc/TA__l8a4cbI/AAAAAAAAAAU/QUrBG9YHWI4/s1600/ceda
w_blog_cc.jpg&w=350&h=500&ei=Rf_kT4G8GMjWrQexhOCBCQ&zoom=
1
lhttp://www.google.co.in/imgres?q=internally+displaced+persons+in+india&hl
=en&biw=1280&bih=923&tbm=isch&tbnid=YarwOSOUfoXNgM:&imgrefur
l=http://transcurrents.com/tc/2009/05/un_calls_for_faster_screening.html&doc
id=5zk9hQqPSS-
YHM&imgurl=http://transcurrents.com/tc/IRIN12014.jpg&w=600&h=446&e
i=9JniT66UKYOzrAebhKmYAw&zoom=1&iact=hc&vpx=723&vpy=448&d
ur=4143&hovh=193&hovw=260&tx=110&ty=124&sig=11470343843155669
5191&page=1&tbnh=135&tbnw=179&start=0&ndsp=30&ved=1t:429,r:15,s:
0,i:117\
lttp://www.google.co.in/imgres?q=internally+displaced+persons+in+india&hl=
en&biw=1280&bih=923&tbm=isch&tbnid=7E_8QVeOHTxbvM:&imgrefurl=
http://revolutionaryfrontlines.wordpress.com/category/southasia/india/andhra-
pradesh/page/2/&docid=WkygfLVwx3uJOM&imgurl=http://southasiarev.files
.wordpress.com/2009/12/india-idps-in-
ap2.jpg&w=300&h=250&ei=9JniT66UKYOzrAebhKmYAw&zoom=1&iact=
hc&vpx=606&vpy=610&dur=3553&hovh=200&hovw=240&tx=146&ty=118
&sig=114703438431556695191&page=2&tbnh=153&tbnw=183&start=30&n
dsp=25&ved=1t:429,r:7,s:30,i:189
lhttp://www.google.co.in/imgres?q=sex+worker+images&hl=en&sa=X&biw=
117
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
1600&bih=799&tbm=isch&prmd=imvns&tbnid=rHuAgGxS0qqTAM:&imgre
furl=http://cchronicle.com/2011/03/selling-sex-how-abolitionist-feminists-are-
hurting-sex-workers/&imgurl=http://cchronicle.com/wp-
content/uploads/2011/03/sex-workers-
rights.jpg&w=500&h=333&ei=T5w_ULzXM4qyrAeD9oCQBw&zoom=1&ia
ct=rc&dur=478&sig=105184705715703869100&page=1&tbnh=136&tbnw=1
89&start=0&ndsp=30&ved=1t:429,r:23,s:0,i:145&tx=70&ty=102
lhttp://www.google.co.in/imgres?q=stateless+persons&start=105&hl=en&sa=
X&biw=1280&bih=923&tbm=isch&prmd=imvns&tbnid=DcOP-
GfXzg8q4M:&imgrefurl=http://activistnews.blogspot.com/2011/08/invisible-
millions-pay-price-of.html&docid=XzyFZrYH5H6JIM&imgurl=http://delany-
making-a-
difference.wikispaces.com/file/view/refugees4.jpg/106834719/refugees4.jpg&
w=300&h=355&ei=TJ_iT7XNPNCxrAelrMW2Aw&zoom=1&iact=hc&vpx=
429&vpy=533&dur=5182&hovh=244&hovw=206&tx=76&ty=120&sig=114
703438431556695191&page=5&tbnh=171&tbnw=144&ndsp=25&ved=1t:42
9,r:11,s:105,i:12
lhttp://www.google.co.in/search?hl=en&biw=1600&bih=799&gbv=2&tbm=is
ch&sa=1&q=article+3+of+cedaw&btnG=#hl=en&gbv=2&biw=1600&bih=79
9&tbm=isch&sa=1&q=first+world+conference+on+women&oq=first+world+
conference+on+women&aq=f&aqi=&aql=&gs_l=img.12...0.0.1.7281.0.0.0.0.
0.0.0.0..0.0...0.0.7dZWqjGoz8g&pbx=1&bav=on.2,or.r_gc.r_pw.r_qf.,cf.osb&
fp=a10f8bad2a9d27fd
lhttp://www.google.co.in/search?q=migrant+workers+images&hl=en&site=we
bhp&prmd=imvns&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ei=Wsr5T4LTPI
mqrAeDlZ3fBg&ved=0CE8QsAQ&biw=1600&bih=799
lhttp://www.google.co.in/search?q=stateless+persons+and+UN+Images&hl=en
&prmd=imvns&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ei=doHwT6mBIo6qrAfDrd
G9DQ&ved=0CD8Q_AUoAQ&biw=1600&bih=799
lhttp://www.herstoria.com/discover/eglantynejebb.html
lhttp://www.humanrights.is/the-human-rights-
project/humanrightscasesandmaterials/humanrightsconceptsideasandfora/Undi
rflokkur/refugees/
lhttp://www.ilo.org/global/standards/subjects-covered-by-international-labour-
standards/migrant-workers/lang--en/index.htm
lhttp://www.ilo.org/global/standards/subjects-covered-by-international-labour-
118
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
standards/migrant-workers/lang--en/index.htm
lhttp://www.imfmetal.org/files/08102914241866/Migrant_workers_in_India.pd
f
lhttp://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/HIVAIDSCartoonen.pdf
lhttp://www.unaids.org/en/aboutunaids/unaidsstrategygoalsby2015/
lhttp://www.unhcr.org/cgi-bin/texis/vtx/home
lhttp://www.unmultimedia.org/s/photo/detail/662/0066207.html
lhttp://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/res3447.htm
lInternational Guidelines on HIV/AIDS and Human Rights 2006 Consolidated 
Version, OHCHR and UNAIDS, July 2006
lKnow your Rights series, Human Rights and HIV/AIDS, National Human 
Rights Commission, see http://nhrc.nic.in
lNational Aids Control Organisation, Know your rights, 
http://www.nacoonline.org/Quick_Links/Know_Your_Rights/
lOHCHR website, Human Rights and HIV/AIDS 
http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/HIV/Pages/HIVIndex.aspx
lOHCHR website, Migration and Human Rights, 
http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Migration/Pages/MigrationAndHumanRights
Index.aspx
lStatelessness, UNHCR website, 
http://www.unhcr.org/pages/49c3646c155.html
lThe Office of  the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) 
Homepage for indigenous people, 
http://www2.ohchr.org/english/issues/indigenous/index.htm
lUN Development Guidelines on Indigenous people, 2008 available at 
http://www2.ohchr.org/english/issues/indigenous/docs/guidelines.pdf
lUn Resolution on Indigenous People 
http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/documents/DRIPS_en.pdf
lUNHCR: Statelessness: An Analytical Framework for Prevention, Reduction 
and Protection 2008  available at http://www.unhcr.org/49a271752.html
lVulnerable Groups 
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTSRM/Publications/20316319/RVA.pdf
119
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
lVulnerable Groups: EU Quality Assurance: 
http://www.eqavet.eu/qa/gns/glossary/v/vulnerable-group.aspx
lVulnerable Groups: http://www.sagepub.com/upm-data/11973_Chapter_5.pdf
• Women’s Rights http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Women's_rights
lNurture: How indigenous women of South America are fighting the 
...soundsandcolours.com
lThe real Avatar story: indigenous people fight to save their forest homes 
...news.mongabay.com
lThese indigenous tribes' relied upon hunting, gathering, ...brazil-travel-
northeast.com
o Aboriginal people 'sing their country' in ceremony that combines song, 
...aboriginalartstore.com.au
o Government of the UPA Report to the People 2010-11
lThe Community-wise break-up of Minority Population in India, ...nmdfc.org
lSikhs - religious minorities in India (only about 2% of the Indian population). 
http//www. pushpinderbagga.com
o Website of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, http://tribal.nic.in
o Website of the National Commission for Minorities
http://ncm.nic.in/Constitutional_provisions.html
o Concluding observations of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination on India’s Report, CERD/C/IND/CO/19, 
5 May 2007
o NHRC's Statement at the World Conference Against Racism etc. at 
Durban,http://www.nhrc.nic.in
o The National Portal of India 
http://india.gov.in/spotlight/spotlight_archive.php?id=33
o http:// www. Minority affairs.gov.in/vision. mission
•http://www.google.co.in/imgres?q=common+photos+of+sexual+minorities&
hl=en&sa=X&biw=1600&bih=756&tbm=isch&prmd=imvnsfd&tbnid=6L_Q
mBKITm5lwM:&imgrefurl=http://vimeo.com/channels/230313/46709778&d
ocid=rPaB4UJJVFs6BM&imgurl=http://b.vimeocdn.com/ts/312/915/3129152
97_640.jpg&w=640&h=427&ei=pQceUIqLAc-
srAe5r4GQAg&zoom=1&iact=hc&vpx=187&vpy=462&dur=2804&hovh=18
3&hovw=275&tx=117&ty=203&sig=112668249727399636140&page=2&tbn
h=136&tbnw=208&start=34&ndsp=41&ved=1t:429,r:9,s:34,i:209
lhttp://www.google.co.in/imgres?q=statelessness+and+UN&hl=en&sa=X&biw
120
HUMAN RIGHTS OF VULNERABLE AND DISADVANTAGED GROUPS
=1600&bih=799&tbm=isch&prmd=imvns&tbnid=uZlUXZGLJHtZNM:&img
refurl=http://tagheemoas.blogspot.com/2010/12/62-years-of-human-rights-yet-
no-
rights.html&docid=jx9zh6AVxDaZuM&imgurl=http://3.bp.blogspot.com/_I4f
FYfImCHA/TQFi3HCeoBI/AAAAAAAAAAY/NCKINeeUEog/s1600/UNH
CR.jpg&w=395&h=500&ei=b7oeUI-zJM-
qrAfp6YHYDQ&zoom=1&iact=hc&vpx=344&vpy=328&dur=2262&hovh=2
53&hovw=199&tx=86&ty=133&sig=112709332683318679526&page=2&tbn
h=152&tbnw=120&start=28&ndsp=35&ved=1t:429,r:8,s:28,i:188
lhttp://infochangeindia.org/hiv-aids/hiv-in-india/the-hivaids-scenario-in-
india.html
lsearch.claro-
search.com/?s=img&babsrc=HP_iclro&q=vulnerable+groups+UN+images&st
art=0
121

About the Author
Dr.T.S.N.Sastry is a senior teacher spanning over more- than two 
decades of teaching, and research experience , especially in the-fields 
of international law and human rights. He authored two books on 
International Law of State Succession, Introduction to Human Rights 
and Duties, edited three books on human rights and constitution. He 
Published a number of Research papers in journals of repute on 
International Law, Human Rights And Constitution of India. He was 
an  academic fellow of the Erasmus Mundus External Window Lot 13. 
Dr. Sastry Delivered lectures on various areas of international law, 
human rights in a number of Indian and foreign Universities. He was 
the fellow under the cultural exchange programme of the Government 
of France. He received Vijaya Shree Award from the Indian 
International Friendship Society, New Delhi in 2005 for his efforts for 
the propagation of Human Rights Education.
Dr Sastry was responsible in establishing the UGC Centre for 
Human Rights and Duties Education in 1997 in the Pondicherry( 
Central) University. As a founder coordinator of the centre, he 
conducted a number of programmes, seminars, and conferences for 
the propagation of human rights, apart from the academic 
programmes leading to research and teaching in human rights. He 
served as Dean, Director, and Controller of Examinations at Tamil 
Nadu Dr. Ambedkar Law University, Chennai. He was a  member of a 
number of academic bodies including the Management Council of 
University of Pune,  and Governmental organisations. . Presently, he 
is the Academic Council Member and Visiting Professor of the 
Chanakya National Law University, Patna.
Dr Sastry Conducted a number of seminars, and the founder of 
the Late. Prof. S. K. Agarwal Post Graduate Moot Court Competition, 
and a Placement Cell in the traditional set up of Law Departments in 
University system.